---GREEK-EXTRA-PAGE---
[RUNNING HEAD]
VII. 2] ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ ΒΕΝΙΑΜΗΝ 223
[BODY]
ποιεῖ, Γἢ³⁸ λαλεῖ, *ἢ ὁρᾷ³⁸, οἶδεν ὅτι³⁹ Κύριος ἐπι-
σκέπτει⁴⁰ τὴν⁴¹ ψυχὴν αὐτοῦ. 7. Καὶ καθαίρει τὴν
διάνοιαν αὐτοῦ πρὸς⁴² τὸ μὴ καταγνωσθῆναι ὑπὸ *τῶν ἀνθρώ-
πων, ὁμοίως καὶ ὑπὸ Θεοῦ. Ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τοῦ Βελίαρ τὰ ἔργα
διπλᾶ ἐστιν, καὶ ἀπλότητα ἐν αὐτοῖς οὐκ ἔχουσιν⁴³.
VII. ΓΔιὰ τοῦτο¹, τέκνα μου, Γλέγω ὑμῖν¹¹, φεύγετε τὴν
κακίαν² †Γτοῦ Βελίαρ³ ὅτι μάχαιραν³ δίδωσιν⁴ τοῖς πειθομένοις
αὐτόν⁵.

c, bg             β-bg, S¹          A
2. Ἡ δὲ μάχαιρα⁶   2. Ἡ δὲ μάχαιρα   2. Καὶ ἡ μάχαιρά
ἑπτὰ κακῶν μήτηρ   ἑπτὰ κακῶν μήτηρ   ἐστι ἑπτὰ κακῶν
[MARGINALIA]
β-α, S¹
ὑπὸ
ἀνθρώ-
πων καὶ
Θεοῦ καὶ
τοῦ
Βελίαρ
δὲ πᾶν
ἔργον
διπλοῦν
ἐστι, καὶ
οὐκ ἔχει
ἁπλό-
τητα.
[APPARATUS]
ἔμπεδον or ἀσφαλῆ. ³⁵ b, S¹ om. ³⁶ c, β, S¹ (save that β, S¹ read οὐδὲ).
Aab*cd=ἀκοὴν καὶ ὅρασιν, but Aefg support c. ³⁷ g reads πάντα δ. c adds ἐάν.
³⁸ d om. ³⁹ d reads γὰρ ὅτι ὁ. ⁴⁰ c, b. adef read ἐπισκοπεύει. g ἐπισκοπεῖ.
a om. rest of chapter. ⁴¹ c. β-a om. ⁴² g reads εἰς. ⁴³ c (save
that I have changed ἔχωσιν into ἔχουσιν). β-a, S¹ read as in margin
(save that d reads ἀπό for ὑπό and dg om. καὶ before τοῦ). For πᾶν γὰρ ὁ
ποιεῖ . . . ἔχουσιν A reads πᾶς γὰρ ὃς ποιεῖ ἔργα Θεοῦ καὶ Βελίαρ διπλοῦς ἐστι καὶ
οὐχ ἁπλότης.
VII. ¹ c. β, A, S¹ om. ² c, β, S¹. Aab*cd = πορνείαν καὶ κακίαν. Aᵇʰ κακίαν
καὶ πορνείαν. Aᵉᵍ πορνείαν. ³ β, Aᵇ*ᶜᵈᵉᵍ, S¹. c, Aᵃᵇ read μάχαιρα. d adds
δίστομον. ⁴ Aᵃᵇʰ = ἐν χειρί ἐστι. ⁵ c. β, S¹ read αὐτῇ. ⁶ The text is
doubtful. Either μάχαιραν . . . μάχαιρα or συλλαμβάνει ἡ διάνοια (c, abef) is
corrupt. For if the latter is original, that is, if the mind conceives
through Beliar and becomes the parent of seven evil conditions of the
individual and of society, then the μάχαιρα cannot be the parent of these.
Hence if συλλαμβάνει ἡ διάνοια is original in the sense ‘the mind
conceiveth,’ we should strike out μάχαιραν . . . μάχαιρα as an interpolation.
Thus we should have: ‘Flee the malice of Beliar; for it is the mother
of seven evils.’ Next let us suppose μάχαιρα to be original. In that
case we must regard συλλαμβάνει ἡ διάνοια as corrupt, and adopt the
reading of Aᵇ*ᶜᵈᵉᵍ ‘and the sword is the mother of seven evils, and it
receives (them) through Beliar.’ For ‘and it receives’ Aᵇ*ᶜᵈᵉᵍ reads ‘which
it has’ (qmp nzh a corruption of k wnzh the text of Aᵃᵇ). Further, as
the sword cannot be said to be the mother of ‘envy,’ for φθόνος we must
read φόνος. We should consider the possibility that συλλαμβάνει is
a rendering of לקח here, as the text of Aᵃᵇ supposes, or rather that
λαμβάνει originally stood here and was changed to συλλαμβάνει owing to
the phrase μήτηρ κακῶν preceding. Then the text of β-bg, S¹, which adds
ὅτε τίκτει, would be explained as a further depravation of the text in the
same direction. Of the above solutions I think the first is to be preferred,
[FOOTNOTES]
Digitized by Google
---END-PAGE---