* TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 167 6. AAAa καὶ περὶ τούτου δὲτλ 6. Butconcerning thisalso . εἴρηται" ἱδρωτάτω ἢ 7 ἐλεη- it hath been said, ** Let thine μοσύνη Gov eis ras χεῖρας cov, alms sweat (drop like sweat) μέχρις ἂν γνῷς τίνι ógs. into thy hands till thou know to whom thou shouldst give." Keg. β΄. Cuap. II. THE SECOND GREAT COMMANDMENT. WARNING AGAINST Gross SINS. 1. Δευτέρα δὲ ἐντολὴ τῆς 1. And the second com- óióayns mandment of the Teaching is : | *ó», (truly), Br., &c. 1 δ μωόατω, Br. Ha. H. ἃ B. Sp.; iópvodro, Hi. i μέχρις, B., &c., or μέχρι, 80 long as, until. 6. idpwrare@.) An error of the scribe. Br. corrects ἰδρωδάτω (from idpow, to sweat, to perspire). Hi. conjectures ἱἰδρυδάτω (from íópvo, to settle, to fix), and explains (p. 104): ‘‘Collocet misericordia tua stipem in manibus tuis." Contrary to εἰς. Zahn proposes μὴ δραχϑήτω, “nicht soll (mit der Faust) gepackt (und festgehalten) werden dein Almosen in deinen Handen bis du weisst, wem du geben solist.” This would give the opposite sense and encourage promiscuous almsgiving, but the emendation is forced and inconsistent with εἰς. The verb i5pow is classical, and the noun ἱδρώς, sweat, occurs Luke xxii. 44. Potwin suggests ἱερωτά r7, sacrosancia, to get out of “ the sweat " and toil of the sentence. Let thine alms drop like sweat into thy hand. | The meaning is, keep your money in your hands, until it makes them sweat. A curious passage quoted as Scripture (sionran), from oral tradition, or an unknown apocryphal book, or some living Prophet. A similar sentence, however, occurs in Ec- clesiasticus, xii. 1-6 (ἐὼν εὖ ποιῇς, γνῶϑι rivi ποιεῖς, X. τ. 4.). Assum- ing the reading of the MS. as amended by Br., the sentence is a warning against indiscriminate and injudicious almsgiving, and shows that the author of the Did, did not understand the commands of the Sermon on the Mount in a strictly literal sense; otherwise he would contradict what he said in the preceding lines. The Ap. Const. (vii. 2) omit the passage. The abuse of promiscuous charity by idlers and impostors led to the practice of giving alms through the bishop, who would inquire into the merits of each case. See the note of Br. who quotes a passage from Justin M. to this effect. NoTES ON CHAPTER II. ' This chapter is an expansion of the commandments of the second table of the Decalogue with reference to prevailing heathen vices. It contains twenty-five points of warning. The first ten refer to the commandments of the second table, the rest mostly to sins of the tongue, especially to those against charity. (Ha. and R.) In the specification of the commandments the author seems to have had Rom. xiii. 9 before him: ‘‘ For this, Thou

168 DOCUMENT I 2. Ov φονεύσεις, ov μοιχεύ.- 2. Thou shalt not kill* σεις, οὐ παιδοφϑορήσεις οὐ Thou shalt not commit adul- πορνεύσεις, ου κλέψεις, οὐ μα- tery ;^ thou shalt not corrupt γεύσεις, οὐ φαρμακεύσεις boys; thou shalt not commit ov φονεύσεις τέκνον ἐν qSo- fornication. Thou shalt not * Ex. xx. 18. ^ Ex, xx. 14. shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet, and if there be any other commandment, it is summed up in this word, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.” 2. ov παιδοφϑορήδεις.) παιδοφϑορέω, to seduce boys, to commit pade- rasty, is not used in the N. T., nor in the Sept., but by Barnabas, Justin M., Ap. Const., Clement of Alex. (quoted by Bryennios), and in classical writers. An unnatural and revolting vice very prevalent among the heathen, even among the best classes in Greece, but severely condemned by the Mosaic law, as an abomination punishable with death, Lev. xviii. 22; xx. 18, and by Paul, Rom. i. 27; 1 Cor. vi. 9 ; 1 Tim. i. 10 (‘‘ abusers of themselves with men”), ov πορνεύδεις. Fornication and concubinage were not considered sin- ful among the heathen. Adultery was condemned, but only as an interfer- ence with the rights of a freeman. οὐ μαγεύσδεις, X, τ. 4.] The practice of magic and enchantments is con- demned, Ex. xxii. 18; Lev. xix. 26; xx. 6; Deut. xviii. 11, 12; Gal. v. 20; comp. Rev. ix. 21 ; xviii. 23; xxi. 8; xxii. 15. The verb tay evo is used Acts viii.9; uay tía or uay a, Acts viii. 11; μαγ os in the sense of sorcerer, Acts xiii. 6,8. «qepuaxsvo is classical and used in the Sept. The N. T. has the nouns φαρμακεία and φαρμακός. Thou shalt not procure abortion, nor shalt thou kill the new-born child.] Against the fearful crime of infanticide in all its forms Christianity raised its indignant protest through Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius, and synodical legislation. A council of Ancyra, 314 (can. xxi.; see Fulton’s Index Can. p. 209) imposes ten years’ penance upon women who “ commit fornication and destroy that which they have conceived, or who are employed in making drugs for abortion.” The exposure of poor or sickly children by parents was very general and was approved, for the public interest, even by Plato, Aristotle, and Seneca. Gibbon says (Decline and Fail, ch. xliv.): **'The Roman Empire was stained: with the blood of infants, till such mur- ders were included, by Valentinian and his colleagues, in the letter and spirit of the Cornelian law. The lessons of jurisprudence and Christianity had been inefficient to eradicate this inhuman practice, till their gentle influence was fortified by the terrors of capital punishment.” See my Church Hist, ii. 860 ; ii. 114. For γεννηϑέντα in the MS. Br. sub. stitutes yevvnSév (conceived, begotten, comp. Matt. i. 20. He quotes a parallel passage from the apocryphal book of Wisdom xii. 5 ** the unmerci- ful murderers of their children” (τέκνων φονέας ἀνελεήμονας). PS0pa in the sense of abortion occurs in Barnabas, Clement of Alex., and Ap. Const, !

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. ~ 3 ? pa, ουδὲ yevynSévra* amox- ^ ? 9 ‘ reveis. Οὐκ ἐπιϑυμήσεις ta τοῦ πλησίον. 8. Οὐκ ἐπιορκήσεις, οὐ φευ- δομαρτυρήσεις, οὐ κακολογή- 2 , σεις, OU MVNOLKANNGELS. 4. Οὐκ ἔσῃ διγνώμων οὐδὲ δίγλωσσος" παγὶς yap Sa- νάτου ἡ διγλωσσία. ὅ. Οὐκ ἔσται ὁ λόγος σου * Ex, xx. 15. © Matt. v. 33. 169 steal* Thou shalt not use witchcraft ; thou shalt not practice sorcery. Thou shalt not procure abortion, nor shalt thou kill the new-born child. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s goods.” 3. Thou shalt not forswear thyself.° Thou shalt not bear false witness.! Thou shalt not speak evil; thou shalt not bear malice. 4. Thou shalt not be double-minded nor double- tongued; for duplicity of tongue is a snare of death. 5. Thy speech shall not be * Ex. xx. 17. 4 Ex. xx. 10. * yevynSév, B. Hi. Ha. W. H. & B. Sp. 8. oU κακολογήσδεις, x. τ. A.] Fa.: thou shalt not speak evil, nor cher- isha grudge. H. and B.: ''T'hou shalt not revile, thou shalt not be revengeful.” xaxoAoyéc occurs repeatedly in the Sept. and the N. T. ; μνηδσιπακέω, to remember past injuries, is classic and used in the Sept. for different He- brew words (see Trommius), but not in the N. T. Br. and Sp. quote a parallel from the Testaments of tbe Twelve Patriarchs (Zabulon, 8): ‘‘ My children, be ye devoid of malice (a@uvn6ixaxot) and love one another, and do not each of you be careful to mark your brother’s badness (κακίαν), for this breaks up unity and scatters to the winds all idea of kinship, and harasses the soul, for the malicious man (μγησίκαξος) has no bowels of compassion." Sp. remarks ; ‘‘The special features which distinguished the sect of the Naza- renes, gentleness, benevolence, kindness, characterize both these early Chris- tian writings" (the Did. and the Testaments of the 12 Patr.). 4. οὐκ ἔσῃ Otyv.] Sty vapor (Siyy@uos) and δίγλωσόδος(δίγλωττος) are classic, the latter in the primary linguistic sense (bilingual ; hence δίγλωδδος as a noun, an interpreter). The former is not biblical, but óiyAcó660s in the moral sense (deceitful, speaking one thing and meaning another) occurs in the Sept., Prov. xi. 18 ; Sirach v. 9, 14; xxviii. 18, and δίλογ os (double-tongued) in 1 Tim. iii. 8. ó:iyAcoG0ía.] Not found in the dictionaries, classical or biblical, but easily coined from the adjective. Barn. uses it ch. xix. 7. 5. μεμεόδτωμένος mpdéet.] Fa.: filled with fact. St.: filled with deed. a
