174 ^ ἐνεργήματα ὡς ayaSa προσ- δέξῃ, εἰδὼς ὅτι ἄτερ Θεοῦ ουδὲν γίνεται. Κεφ. δ΄. 1. Τέκνον μου, τοῦ λαλοῦν- τός σοι τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ μνηϑήσῃ νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας, τιμήσεις δὲ αὐτὸν ὡς Κύριον" ὅϑεν γὰρ ἡ κυριότης λαλεῖται, ἐκεῖ Κυριὸς ἐστιν. 2. Exénrnoes δὲ xa ἡμέ- DOCUMENT L thee thou shalt accept as good, knowing that nothing hap- pens without God. CHaP. IV. SUNDRY WARNINGS AND EXHORTATIONS. 1. My child, thou shalt re- member night and day him that speaks to thee the word of God,* and thou shalt honor him as the Lord, for where the Lordship is spoken of, there is the Lord. 2. And thou shalt seek out * Comp. Heb. xiii. 7. ever is brought upon thee take cheerfully." Clement of Alex. describes the Christian Gnostic (philosopher) as a man ‘‘ who takes everything for good, though it may seem evil, and who is not disturbed by anything that hap- pens" (Strom. vii. 12, 13). Quoted by Br. ἄτερ] without, apart from. <A poetic word used by Homer and Pindar (ἄτερ Znvos, without Zeus, i. e., without his will) ; also occurring twice in the N. T. (Luke xxii. 6, 85), and in 2 Macc. xii. 15. Notes ro CHAPTER IV. This chapter enjoins duties on Christians as members of the Church. 1. Thou shalt remember.] Comp. Heb. xiii. 7: ‘‘ Remember them that had the rule over you; who spake unto you the word of God." The rulers are all the church officers, Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Bishops and Deacons (comp. XI. 2, 4; XV. 2). Honor him as the Lord.| Comp. XI. 2; Matt. x. 40-42; Gal, iv. 14: ** Ye received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.” xvpior:5s) variously rendered, Lordship (R., St, Ha.: Herrschaft); the glory of the Lord (G., Sp., W.); that which pertaineth to the Lord (H. and B.); lordly rule (H. and N.); sovereignty of the Lord (O.). The word is not elassieal, but occurs, without the article, four times in the N. T. (Eph. i. 21; Col. i. 16; Jude 8; 2 Pet. ii. 10), and is always rendered dominion in the R. V. The Ap. Const. vii. 9 gives an explanatory substitute: ** Where is the teaching concerning God (ἡ περὶ Seov 616 x6xaAía), there God is pres- ent.” It refers to Christ, his person, word and work, as ‘‘the Lord of glory," Jas. ii. 1, and gives a hint of the Christology which underlies the Did. 2. Thou shalt scek out, etc.] A strong sense of the communion of saints pervades this treatise. ‘‘Saints” is used in the N. T. sense for all believers. So also X. 6, “if any one be holy.” Rest upon their words.] H. and B.: refreshed by. So also Ha.: dass du

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 175 pav rà πρόσωπα τῶν ἁγίων, day by day the faces of the iva ἐπαναπαῆς" rois λόγοις saints, that thou mayest rest αὐτῶν. upon their words. 3. Ov ποϑήσεις + σχίσμα, 8. Thou shalt not desire εἰρηνεύσεις δὲ μαχομένους: (make) division, but shalt κρινεῖς δικαίως, ov λήψῃ mpo- make peace between those ownov ἐλέγξαι ἐπὶ παραπτώ- at strife. Thou shalt judge μασιν. justly; thou shalt not re- spect a person (or, show par- tiality) in rebuking for trans- gressions. 4. Ov δ τῷ υχήσεις, πότερον 4. Thou shalt not be double- ἔσται ἢ oU. minded (doubtfulin thy mind) whether it shall be or not.? *Comp. Sir. i. 28 ; James i. 8 ; iv. 8. * ixavanavy, Br. Sp. Sa.; étavanays, Ha. Hi. + 2017615, Ha, Hi. The reading of the Jerus. MS. is retained by W. R. Sp. Sa. durch thre Gesprdche (1?) erquickt werdest. Br. reads ἐπαναπαύῃ, Hi. and Ha. éxavanays, to conform to the corresponding passage in Ap. Const. vii. 0. ἀναπαύω, to give rest, to refresh, occurs 12 times in the N. T.; éxavmavopuat, to rest upon, only twice, Luke x. 6; Rom. ii. 17. 8. oU ποϑήδεις 6yíóua.] So the MS. Hi., Ha., and Z. adopt ποιήσεις, which is easier and sustained by the parallel passages in Barnabas (xix.) and Ap. Const. vii. 10. zoSéc is classical and Hellenistic, but does not occur in the N. T., which has éz:z09£c 9 times, and àxt1z097561:$ twice, ἐπιπόϑητος once, and éxzzoSia once, Gyíóua is used here in the same sense as 1 Cor. i. 10 and xi. 18, of parties or factions within the church. éipnveéva.] Here transitive, to make peace, as also in Clemens Rom., and in 1 Macc. vi. 60. In the N. T. it is intransitive, to have peace, or fo be at peace (in 4 places). 4, διψυχησε:ις be of two minds (F., Fa., R.); waver tn soul (St.); hesitate (A. and B., Sp.); be undecided (H. and N.); doubt in thy heart (G.). The verb occurs in Clement of Rome, Barnabas, Hermas, and Cyril of Alex.; the adj. δίψυχος in Philo and James. The warning refers not to the Divine judgment (Ha.: Zhweifle nicht, ob Gottes Gericht kommen wird oder nicht), but to doubtfulness in prayer. Br. compares Sirach i. 28: 47 MPOGEAIHS, αὐτῷ (τῷ Seg) ἐν καρδίᾳ 61667, and James i. 8: ἀνὴρ δίψυχος axardóraros ἐν maóGaois ταῖς ὁδοῖς αὐτοῦ. Comp. also Jas. iv. 8; Matt. xxi. 22; 1 John v. 14, 15. Ap. Const. vii. 11 correctly under- stand it: oU διψυχήσεις ἐν προδευχῇ Gov. Br. quotes also Hermas, who says (Mand. ix. on Prayer): ** Remove doubt from thyself, and doubt not to ask anything from God. Neither say within thyself, How can I ask and re-

176 DOCUMENT L 5. Μὴ yivov. xpos μὲν τὸ ὅ. Benotonethatstretches λαβεῖν ἐκτείνων ras χεῖρας, out his hands for receiving, πρὸς δὲ τὸ δοῦναι συσπῶν. but draws them in for giv- ing.* 6. Ἐὰν ἔχης, διὰ τῶν yer- 6. If thou hast [anything], ρῶν cov δώσεις λύτρωσιν thou shalt give with thy ἁμαρτιῶν Gov. hands a ransom for thy sins.^ 7. Ov διστάσεις δοῦναι ov- 7. Thou shalt not hesitate * Ecclus. iv. 31. * Comp. Dan. iv. 27; Tobit iv. 10, 11. ceive from the Lord, seeing that I have coinmitted so many sins against Him? Reason not thus with thyself, but turn unto the Lord with thy whole heart and ask from Him, nothing doubting, and thou shalt know his great compassion, that He will not abandon thee, but will fulfil the request of thy soul. For He is not as men who bear malice, but He himself is without malice, and has compassion on his work.” 5. A graphic description of generous liberality, a quotation from Sirach iv. 91: μὴ ἔστω ἡ χείρ Cov ἐκτεταμένη ets ro Aaffelv xai ἐν rà ἀποδι- δόναι Gvve6raAuévg. For 6véna@v (6vozac, to draw together, to con- tract, in Plato, Aristotle, Lucian, etc., but not in Sept. nor in N. T.) the Ap. Const. vii. 11 substitute συστέλλων, in partial conformity to Sirach. Active charity and self-denying generosity is made a very prominent virtue in the Did., as it was among the primitive Christians notwithstanding their general poverty. Different renderings: Fa. and Sp.: one who síreiches out his hands to receive and clenches them tight for giving. H. and N.: a stretcher forth . . . to receive, and a drawer back to give. R.: one that stretcheth out, but shutteth them close. F.: one who holds open the hands to receive but clinched toward giving. St.: extending . . . contracting. G.: stretch out, draw back. 6. If thou hast, etc.] May be understood of the meritoriousness and aton- ing efficacy of almsgiving as an equivalent (λύτρον, ransom). This error erept very early into the church, but has, like most errors, an element of truth which gives it power and tenacity. Br. quotes several parallel pas- sages. Comp. Prov. xvi. 6: ‘‘ By mercy and truth iniquity is purged;" Dan. iv. 27 (in Sept. iv. 24) where Daniel counsels King Nebuchadnezzar: ‘‘ Break off thy sins by righteousness and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor.” Tobit iv. 10: ἐλεημοσύνη ἐκ Savarov ῥύεται xai ovx ἐᾷ εἐδελ- Seiv εἰς τὸ Gxoros. 11: δῶρον yap ayaSov ἐστιν ἐλεημοσύνη πᾶδι τοῖς ποιοῦσιν αὐτὴν ἐνώπιον τοῦ ὑψίότου. Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (Zabulon, 8): **In proportion as a man is pitiful towards his neighbor will the Lord be pitiful towards him" (060v γὰρ av ἄνϑρωπος | ὅπλαγχνίζεται eis τὸν πλησίον, τοδοῦτον Κύριος εἰς αὐτόν). 7. Nor in giving shalt thou murmur.] Comp. 2 Cor. ix. 7: **God loveth a cheerful giver.” 1 Pet. iv. 9: **Use hospitality one to another without

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. δὲ διδοὺς γογγύσεις' γνώσῃ γὰρ τίς ἐστιν ἡ" τοῦ μισϑοῦ καλὸς avra oó ὅτης. 8. Ουκ ἀποστραφήσῃ τὸν͵ ἐνδεόμενον, συγκοινωνήσεις δὲ πάντα τῷ ἀδελφῷ σου καὶ ουκ ἐρεῖς ἔδια εἶναι" εἰ γὰρ EV τῷ αϑανάτῳ κοινωνοΐ ἔστε, ποσῷ μᾶλλον ἐν rois ϑνητοῖς:; 177 to give, nor in giving shalt thou murmur, for thou shalt know who is the good recom- penser of the reward. 8. Thou shalt not turn away him that needeth, but shalt share all things with thy brother, and shalt not say that they are thine own;* forif you are fellow-sharers in that which is imperisha- ble (immortal), how much more in perishable (mortal) things ?° 9. Ovx ἀρεῖς τὴν χεῖρά σου 9. Thou shalt not take * Acts, iv. 32. * Comp. Rom. xv. 27. * 6, Br. et al. murmuring.” F'a. deems it probable that the Didachographer had read the first Ep. of Peter. 8. Thou shalt not turn away, etc.] This points to the community of goods, which was introduced at Jerusalem in the pentecostal fervor of brotherly love, but passed away with the growth and changed circumstances of the church ; at least we find it in no other congregation. The Agape remained for a while as a reminder of that state. The Acts in describing it uses in part the same words (iv. 82): ** And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and soul: and not one of them said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own (020v εἶν αἱ), but they had all things common.” If you are fellow-sharers] Or, partakers, partrers, joint participants. In Rom. xv. 27 the Gentiles are represented as debtors to the Jews for the spiritual gifts received from them. The idea is the same, but πνευματικά and 6ap»xix« are used for ἀϑάνατον and Svgra. For ἀϑάνατος, which is classical and Hellenistic, the N. T. uses ἄφϑαρτος (in 7 places, e. g., 1 Pet. iii. 4; 1 Tim. i 17). It has also the substantives apSapoia (8 times), and aSavacia (8 times). 9. From their youth up, etc.] Christian family nurture enjoined, Eph. vi. 4: ** Nurture your children in the chastening and admonition of the Lord.” It is said of Timothy that from childhood (ἀπὸ βρέφους, from a babe) he knew the sacred writings, 1 Tim. iii. 15. Clement of Rome (Ep. to the Cor. xxi.): ‘‘Let your children be sharers in true Christian training." Hermas (Vis. 1. 8): ** Fail not to rebuke thy children, for I know that if they shall repent with all their heart, they shall be written in the book of life, together

178 ἀπὸ τοῦ υἱοῦ σου 7) ano τῆς ϑυγατρός σου, aha ἀπὸ νε- otntos διδαξεις τὸν φόβον τοῦ Θεοῦ. 10. Οὐκ ἐπιτάξεις δούλῳ σου 7 παιδίσκῃ, rois ἐπὶ τὸν αὐτὸν Θεὸν ἐλπίξουσιν, εν πικρίᾳ σου, μήποτε οὐ μὴ φο- βηϑήσονται TOV em ἀμφο- τέροις Θεον' οὐ γὰρ ἔρχεται κατὰ πρόσωπον "καλέσαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐφ᾽ oUs τὸ πνεῦμα ἡτοί- pacer. DOCUMENT IL away thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but from [their] youth up thou shalt teach [them] the fear of God. 10. Thou shalt not in thy bitterness lay commands on thy man-servant (bondman), or thy maid-servant (bond- woman), who hope in the . same God, lest they should not fear Him whois God over [you] both ;* for He comes not to call [men] according to the outward appearance (condition), but [he comes] on those whom the Spirit has prepared. 11. But ye, bondmen, shall be subject to our (your) mas- ll. Tyueis δὲ δούλοι" ὑπο- ταγήσεσϑε τοῖς κυρίοις ἡμῶν * Comp. Eph. vi. 9 (Col. iv. 1). * oi δοῦλοι, Br. Ha. Hi. Sa. t ouv, Br. &c. with the saints." (Quoted by Br.) The Jews and Christians were far ahead of the cultivated heathen in religious knowledge and intelligence. 10, 11. The same view of slavery as that taken Eph. vi. 5-9; Tit. ii. 9; the Ep. to Philemon, and 1 Pet. ii. 18. It is not forbidden by the Apostles, but regulated, moderated, and put in the way of ultimate abolition by the working of the Christian spirit of love and brotherhood infused into the mas- ter and slave. Br. quotes Ignatius Ad Polyc. iv. (in Funk's ed. i. 248): ** Do not despise either male or female slaves, yet neither let them be puffed up, but rather let them submit themselves the more for the glory of God that they may win a better liberty from God. Let them not desire to be set free at publie cost [at the expense of the church], lest they be found slaves to their own lusts.” This is, however, not to be understood as prohibiting emancipation at private expense, which was at all times encouraged by the church and regarded as a meritorious deed. See Church History, I. 444 sqq.; II. 347 sqq. 10. Whom the Spirit has prepared.] A clear allusion to the work of the Spirit in the human heart. Comp. Rom. viii. 29, 80. The only other place where the Holy Spirit is mentioned is in the baptismal formula, ch. VII. 11. Br. corrects ἡμῶν of the MS. to ὑμῶν, which is accepted by most editors.
