TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 181 στρεφόμενοι τὸν évóeoyuevov, destroyers of the handiwork καταπονοῦντες τὸν ϑλιβόμε- of God, turning away from vov, πλουσίων παρακλητοι, the needy, vexing the af- πεγήτων ἄνομοι κριταί, παν- flicted, advocates of the rich, Sapaprytor ῥυσϑείητε, τέκ- lawless judges of the poor, va, ἀπὸ τούτων ἁπάντων. wholly sinful. May ye, children, be deliv- . ered from all these. Κεφ. «ς΄. Cuap. VI. WARNING AGAINST FALSE TEACHERS AND THE WonsHIP OF IDOLS. 1. Ὅρα μῆ τις σε πλανήση 1. Take heed that no one ἀπὸ ταύτης τῆς ὁδοῦ τῆς δι- lead thee astray from this way δαχῆς, éxel*. παρεκτὸς Θεοῦ of teaching, since he teacheth σε διδάσκει. thee apart from God. 2. Ei μὲν yap δύνασαι βασ- 2. For if indeed thou art * ἐπειδὴ, Hi. Notes TO CHaPTEE VI. 1. From this way of teaching] Barnabas xviii. 1; ὁδοὶ δύο εἰδὶ διδαχῆς. παρεκτὸς ϑεοῦ] R.: not according to God. παρεκτὸς is not classical, but occurs three times in the N. T. 2. The whole yoke of the Lord.] Matt. xi. 29: ''Take my yoke (τὸν ζυγόν μου) upon you... my yoke is easy and my burden is light." Inthe Council of Jerusalem, A.D. 50, Peter said, Acts xv. 10, 11, in opposition to the strict Jewish party : ‘‘ Why tempt ye God, that ye should put a yoke (ζυγ ov) upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear (aór«óa:)? But we believe that we shall be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, in like manner as they [the Gentiles].” This was the principle of Paul. But a Jewish-Christian reaction took place & year or two afterwards at Antioch under the authority of James of Jeru- salem. and even Peter and Barnabas were carried away by the over-conser- vative current (Gal. ii. 19). Hence the temporary breach between Paul and Peter, and the bold remonstrance of the former in the presence of the con- gregation, which consisted of Jewish and Gentile converts. It must have been a most serious crisis when the two greatest Apostles in the midst of their career of usefulness stood face to face against each other, and Paul charged Peter with hypocrisy for denying, by his timid conduct in Antioch, the doctrine he had proclaimed a year before at Jerusalem. It foreshadowed the antagonism between the conservative and progressive, the legalistic and evangelical tendencies which run through church history; it was typical

182 DOCUMENT L τάσαι ὅλον τὸν δυγὸν τοῦ able to bear the whole yoke Κυρίου, τέλειος ἔσῃ: εἰ δ᾽ ov of the Lord thou shalt be δύνασαι, ὃ δύνῃ τοῦτο ποίει. perfect; but if thou art not able, do what thou canst. of the conflict between Catholicism and Protestantism. The writer of the Didache evidently belonged to the Jewish-Christian party, and in this again to James rather than Peter. James stood at the head of the right wing on the very border of what was afterwards called the Ebionitic heresy, yet dif- fering from it in spirit and aim. Peter occupied a position in the centre between James and Paul. By ‘‘the whole yoke of the Lord,” the Did. means, no doubt, the ceremonial law which Peter had pronounced unbear- able, but which James and his sympathizers seem to have borne to the end of their lives from habit and reverence for their ancestral traditions. But the Did. shows here a mild and toierant spirit. The whole yoke is not required, but only as much as one is able to bear. Noreflection is cast upon those who cannot bear it. Ha. has here a long note trying to show that the Didache means by the whole yoke the counsels of perfection or the requirements of monastic asceticism, especially celibacy. But celibacy is nowhere mentioned in the Did. and its over-estimate had no root in the Old Testament where the family occupies a much higher place. All the leaders of the theocracy, the patri- archs, Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David, and several of the Prophets were married men. So was St. Peter. The contempt of marriage was of heathen origin and connected with the dualistic theory held by all the Gnostic sects. Paul denounces it as a doctrine of demons, 1 Tim. iv. 1, 2. Thou shalt be perfect.| Matt. xix. 21 (ef SéAevs τέλειος etvat). This passage was very early made the basis of the doctrine of perfection and of a distinction between a lower morality for the masses and a higher morality for the elect few who renounce property and marriage for the sake of Christ, and thus literally follow him. This higher morality acquired a correspond- ingly higher merit. It is the foundation of the practice of the orthodox Ascetics who abstained from flesh, wine, and marriage for their own good without denouncing them, and of the heretical Enkratites ("Eyxparezs, "Ey xparirat) who based their abstinence on the essential impurity of the things renounced. Im the Nicene age the ascetic tendency assumed an organized form in the system of monasticism, which swept with irresistible moral force over the whole Catholic church, East and West, and found enthusiastic advocates among the greatest of the fathers; as Athanasius and Chrysostom, Jerome and Augustin. How far the Didachographer favored this higher morality does not appear from his book; but from a reference to the community of goods, IV. 8, we may infer that he included voluntary poverty in his ideal of perfection. James of Jerusalem is described by Hegesippus, an orthodox Jewish Christian from the middle of the second century, as a saint of the N. azarite and Essenic type. See Church History, i. 276 sq. ; ii. 742 sqq. Jf thou art not able, etc.] Comp. Matt. xix. 11: "" All men cannot receive

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 188 3. Περὶ δὲ τῆς βρώσεως, o 3. And as regards food, δύνασαι facracGov: ἀπὸ δὲ bear what thou canst, but τοῦ εἰδωλοϑύτου λίαν mp00- against idol-offerings be ex- — ——— —Ó— — — — — this saying, but they to whom it is given;” 1 Cor. vii. 7: ‘‘ Each man hath his own gift from God, one after this manner, and another after that.” 8. As regards food.] The Levitical law concerning clean and unclean meats. Peter clung to that distinction till he was taught a more liberal view by the revelation at Joppa (Acts x.). The Council of Jerusalem adopted a compromise between the Jewish and Hellenic Christians and prohibited meat which had been offered to the gods (ἀπέχεόϑαι εἰδωλοϑύτων) and was contaminated with idolatry (Acts xv. 20, 29). The synodical letter was written by James and begins with χαίρειν (ver. 23), like his Epistle (1. 1). To this decree the Did. refers and puts upon it a strict construction, like John, Apoc. ii. 14, 20 (where the eating of idol offerings is associated with fornication); while Paul takes a more liberal view and puts the abstinence from such meat on the law of expediency and regard for the conscience of weaker brethren, 1 Cor. viii. 4-19; x. 18, 19, 28, 29; comp. Rom. xiv. 20 sq. The same prohibition was, however, repeated by writers of the second century, e. g. Justin Martyr (Dial. c. Tryph. Jud. c. xxxiv. and xxxv.), and by the Council of Gangra (in the second canon), and in the sixty-third of the Apost. Canons (see Fulton’s Index Can. pp. 101 and 223). The Greek church regards the decree of Jerusalem as binding for all time. The Latin church followed Paul. Dead gods.| Comp. 1 Cor. viii. 4. Br. quotes from the so-called second Ep. of Clement to the Cor, c, iii,: 74625 oi ζῶντες τοῖς vex pois S eots οὐ ϑύομεν xal ov προόδκυνοῦμεν αὐτοῖς, and from the Ep. to Diognetus, 6. iL, where the idol gods are called κωφαί, τυφλά, ἄψυχα, ἀναίόϑητα, anivyra (deaf, blind, lifeless, destitute of feeling, incapable of motion.) Here closes the catechetical section. It is purely ethical and practical. But religious instruction necessarily is also historical and dogmatical. It cannot be supposed that this was altogether omitted. How could catechu- mens be expected to believe in Christ as their Lord and Saviour without some knowledge of his person and work, his life, death and resurrection? The Didache implies such additional teaching by its frequent references to the Gospel and the commandments of the Lord from which nothing should be taken away (IV. 13), and by its allusion to the preparatory work of the Holy Spirit in the heart (IV. 10. Much was added by the regular teachers who preached to the catechumens **the word of God " and the * Lordship” of Christ (IV. 1), and by the saints whose faces they should seek day by day (EV. 2). But the moral instruction in the fundamental duties of the Chris- tian was of immediate and primary importance. Very often the preparation for Baptism was even much shorter than here, as in the case of the pente- costal converts (Acts ii.), of the Eunuch (ch. viii.), of Cornelius (ch. x.), and of the jailer at Philippi (xvi. 31). Instruction is supposed to continue after Baptism in the bosom of the Church, which is a training-school for heaven.
