184 DOCUMENT I. eye’ λατρεία yap ἐστι ϑεῶν ceedingly on thy guard, for νεκρῶν. it is a service of dead gods. Keg. à. Cuap. VII. ΒΑΡΤΊΡΙ, 1. Περὶ δὲ τοῦ βαπτίσμα- 1, Now concerning bap- Y / ^ e. e. . τος, OUTGO βαπτίσατε' ταῦτα (ism, baptize thus: Having mavra προείποντες, Banti- first taught all these things, 9 » ~ , . . Gare eis τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ Πατρὸς baptize ye into the name of NoTES TO CHAPTER VII. In the first six chapters the Catechumen was addressed as ‘‘ my child.” Chs. VII.-XVI. are addressed to the church members and congregations. Hence the plural, ye (Gazricare VII. 1; comp. ὑμῶν, VIII 1; προδεύ- χεὄϑε, VIII. 8; evyapioryre, IX. 1; X. 15; ducts, XI. 1, 4 ; xAdoare, XIV.1; χειροτονήδατε, XV. 1, γρηγορεῖτε, XVI. 1, etc.). Baptism is first treated of because it is the solemn introduction of the convert into the privileges and duties of chureh membership. Comp. on this chapter the previous discussions, pp. 29 sqq. περὶ δέ} δέ and ταῦτα πάντα πρηειπόντες show the connection with the preceding catechetical instruction which terminates in Baptism. In the case of infant-Baptism, which is not contemplated in the Did., instruc- tion follows and looks to confirmation as its aim. ταῦτα πάντα προειπόντες] Fa.: having taught all that goes before. St. and R.: having said (taught) beforchand all these things. H. and N.: having first said all these things. Sp.: having first rehearsed all these things. H. and B.: having first uttered. A free rendering would be: after the pre- ceding instruction in all these things. It is referred to the first six chapters, except by Bielenstein, who understands by it a baptismal address. βαπτίδατε] No special officer is mentioned ; any Christian, it seems, could baptize at that time. Jesus himself never baptized (John iv. 2), Paul only in exceptional cases (1 Cor. i, 14-17). Justin Mart. mentions no par- ticular baptizer, but Ignatius (Ad Smyrn. viii. 2) represents Baptism as a prerogative of the Bishop, or at least as requiring his presence : ‘‘ It is not lawful without the Bishop either to baptize or to celebrate the Agape; but whatsoever he shall approve of, that is also pleasing to God, so that every- thing that is done may be secure and valid.” εἰς τὸ ὄνομα. x. τ. À.] into (not in, as in the A. V.) the name, i. e. into communion and covenant relationship with the revealed persons of the Holy Trinity. The Did. gives the precise baptismal formula, Matt. xxviii. 19. One of the exact quotations. Tht first proof of the use of this formula. It includes belief in the divinity of Christ and the Holy Spirit, as co-ordinated with the Father. In ver. 3 the article before the divine names is omitted by carelessness, Baptism in the name of Jesus only, is not mentioned ; nor is

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 185 καὶ tov Υἱοῦ xal τοῦ ἁγίου the Father, and of the Son, Πνεύματος ἐν ὕδατι GÀvri. ‘and of the Holy Ghost, in living water. 2. Ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ἔχῃς ὕδωρ 2 And if thou hast not δῶν, εἰς ἄλλο ὕδωρ flazricov: living water, baptize into εἰ 6’ ov δύνασαι ἐν φυχρῷ, other water; and if thou ἐν ϑερμῷ. canst not in cold, then in | ^ warm (water). 3. Ἐὰν δὲ ἀμφότερα μὴ 3. Butifthou hast neither, the threefold repetition, but this must be inferred from rps in ver. 8. Ter- tullian, Adv. Praz. xxvi.: ‘‘Nec semel, sed ter, ad singula nomina in perso- nas singulas tinguimur.” ἐν ὕδατι ζῶντι] Comp.John iv. 10, 11; vii. 88. Living water is fresh, clean water in motion, 4. ¢., river-water or spring-water, as distinct from stagnant water. Br.:-0ó0cpo ζῶν λέγει τὸ ἄρτι ἀπὸ τοῦ φρέατος mv- τλημένον, τὸ ὑπόγυιον, τὸ πρόόφατον xai vtapov. Ha. would con- fine /íving water to river-water, and translates fliessendes Wasser. The preference of the ante-Nicene Church was for Baptism in a running stream, as the Jordan, the Nile, the Tiber ; the baptized standing, undressed, knee- deep or waist-deep in the water, while the baptizer on the shore, slightly clothed, dipped the candidate’s head under the water and helped him out of the river. See the illustrations from the Catacombs, p. 88 sqq. The prefer- ence for river-Baptism was based on the typical baptism of Christ in the Jor- dan, and continued till the age of Constantine, when special Baptisteries were built with different apartments and other conveniences, for both sexes and all seasons of the year. With the decline of adult-Baptism and the general introduction of infant-Baptism in Christianized Europe the Baptist- eries were no more needed and gave way to baptismal fonts in the churches. 9. εἰς ἄλλο ὕδωρ] Br.: μὴ πρόόδφατον μὲν καὶ veapor, ψυχρὸν δέ. Cold water in pools, reservoirs, cisterns, baths. In Galilee the lake was most convenient. In and around Jerusalem the Kidron is dry during the summer, but there are large pools (Bethesda, Hezekiah, the upper and lower Gihon) ; and almost every house has a cistern filled with rain-water. The same choice is given by Tertullian, De Bapt. iv.: ** Nulla distinctio est, mari quis an stagno, flumine an fonte, lacu an alveo diluatur.” ἐν ϑερμῷ)] Warm water does not so well symbolize the refreshing, re- generating ageney of the Holy Spirit as cold water, but it was permitted in cases of sickness, in cold climates, and inclement seasons. The sacrament was then probably administered at home or in publie baths. Br.: εἶτε δι᾽ a6Sévewxv καὶ APPWOTIAY τοῦ δώματος, eire καὶ διὰ THY ὥραν τοῦ ἔτους, βάπτιδον ἐν ϑερμῷ ἤτοι χλιαρῷ. Then he quotes from Gregory of Nyssa, who says that all kindsof water are good for Baptism, provided there is faith on the part of the baptized and the blessing of the baptizer. Farrar infers that the writer lived in a cold region. 3. But if thou hast neither] 4. 6. neither living water nor other water (cold

186 DOCUMENT I. ἔχῃς, ἔεχεον eis τὴν κεφαλὴν pour [water] thrice upon τρὶς ὕδωρ tis ὄνομα Πατρὸς the head in the name of the καὶ Υἱοῦ καὶ ἁγίου Ivevya- Father, and of the Son, and TOS. of the Holy Ghost. or warm) in sufficient quantity for immersion. So J. W., Fa., R., Ma. (en quantité suffisante), and others. Immersion must be meant in all previous modes, else there would be no difference between them and the last. So also Br.: ἐὰν μήτε ψυχρὸν unre ϑερμὸν ὕδωρ ἔχῃς ἱκανὸν εἰς τὸ ffan- τιόμα, but he adds as an additional condition the necessity of Baptism (xai avaynn ἐπιότῇ ro) flazríóuaros), and confines the permission of pour- ing to cases of severe sickness (in periculo mortis), or what is called clinical Baptism, referring to Tertullian and Cyprian. Fa. assents. But the Did. mentions only the scarcity of water, not the state of the candidate. The restriction to cases of sickness, and the disqualification for the priesthood of persons baptized by aspersion on the death-bed, seem to date from the third century. Cyprian (250) had to refute existing doubts on the validity of clini- cal Baptism. The doubts, however, were not based so much on the defective mode, but on the suspicion of the sincerity of motive. ἔκχεον, x. τ. λ.] The first instance of Baptism by pouring or aspersion, and that without the least doubt of its validity. A remarkable passage, which has elicited much discussion and controversy. B. Maury (p. 29): ** Voilà le plus ancien example du baptéme par aspersion, sans que le moindre doute 80it élévé sur sa validité." Harn.: ‘* Wir haben hicr das diteste Zeug- niss für die Zulassung der Aspersionstaufe ; besonders wichtig vst, daas der Verf. auch nicht das geringste Schwanken dber ihre Gültigkeit verrdth. Die Zeugnisse fiir ein frühes Vorkommen der Aspersion waren bislang entweder, was thre Zeit (so die bildlichen Darstellungen der Aspersion ; 8. Kraus, Roma Sotter. 2. Aufl. S. 811 f), oder was thre Beweiskraft (Tert. de pentt. 6 ; de bapt. 12) betrifft, nicht genügend. sichere ; jetzt ist ein Zweifel nicht mehr móglich. Aber die Bedenken tiber thre volic Giiltigkeit mégen in manchen Landeskirchen uralt gewesen sein ; doch kann man sich auf Huseb. H. E. οἱ. 43, 14, 15, für dieselben nur mit Zurtickhaltung berufen ; dagegen auf Cypr. ep. 69, 12-14, und auf die Praxis des Orients. | Unserem Verf. ist die Aus- eprechung der drei heiligen Namen die Hauptsache und desshalb auch die dret- malige Aspersion.” Farrar: ‘‘In this permission of (trine) affusion our [Church of England] rubric is anticipated by eighteen centuries. The alln- sion, however, seems to be to private baptisms in periculo mortis. Infant- Baptism is not here contemplated.” εἰς τὴν κεφαλήν] The application of water to the head, as the seat of intelligence, is absolutely essential and the chief part of Baptism ; but the wetting of other parts of the body is not indispensable. τρίς] Trine immersion in the name of the three persons of the Trinity is the universal rule in the Eastern churches. In the West single immersion was practiced for a while in Spain, and sanctioned by Pope Gregory I.; but the Roman Rituals prescribe trine immersion and trine affusion. See Ch. XVII.
