TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 187 4. Πρὸ δὲ τοῦ βαπτίσματος 4. But before Baptism let προνηστευσατω ὁ βαπτίδων the baptizer and the bap- καὶ ὁ Bantigopevos* καὶ ei tized fast, and any others tives ἄλλοι δύνανται: κελεύ- who can; but thou shalt εἰς δὲ νηστεῦσαι τὸν Banti- command the baptized to fast GOMEVOY πρὸ μιᾶς ἢ) δύο. for one or two days before. Keg. η. Cnar. VIII. PRAYER AND Fasting. 1. At δὲ νηστεῖαι ὑμῶν μὴ 1. Let not your fasts be ἔστωσαν μετὰ τῶν vzoxpi- with the hypocrites,* for they τῶν: νηστεύουσι yap Ósuré fast on the second and fifth * Comp. Matt. vi. 16. * oí Banriouervot, Hi. T xeAevoers, Br. Hi. Sa. &e. 4. Fasting before Baptism was the general practice in the ante-Nicene age, as we learn from Justin M. and Tertullian. In the Ap. Const. vii. 92, - it is enforced by the fasting of Christ after Baptism, which He did not need himself, but by which He set us an example. The fasting of the baptizers probably soon went out of use, and is not mentioned in the Ap. Const. It indicates the early age of the Did. and the family feeling of the community from which it proceeded. κελεύεις) Br. reads κελεύδεις. Ha. retains the reading of the MS. in the text, but translates gebiete. The command goes beyond the N. T., and is one of the ‘‘commandments of men." It was probably based on Matt. xvii. 21 (text rec.); Mark ix. 29: ‘‘ This kind goeth not out save by prayer and fasting.” There is no trace of exorcism in the Did., but it was connected with Baptism in the second century. The rule of fasting is stiil observed in the East in cases of adult Baptism, which are very rare. In England, down to the time of the Reformation, the candidates for Confirmation and the Bishop were required to fast before the ceremony. ὁ Nores TO CHAPTER VIII. 1. μετὰ τῶν ὑποκριτῶν ἴῃ common, or together with those of the hypo- erites, 4. e., the Pharisees, as in ver. 2 (not the Jews generally, as Ha. deems probable). Comp. Matt. vi. 16: ** When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of & sad countenance." In Luke xviii. 12, the Pharisee in the Temple boasts: ‘‘I fast twice in the week." This is the only allusion to Jews in the Did., which differs on the one hand from the anti-Jewish violence of Bar- nabas, and on the other from the Judaizing sympathy of the Ebionites. Christ opposes the spirit of hypocritical and ostentatious fasting, but : gives no direction as to days. The Did. opposes the Jewish fast days, and replaces them by two other fast days. Christian Judaism versus Mosaic Judaism. Another indication of the early date and Jewish origin of the

! LI | i 188 DOCUMENT 1. pe cafifarov καὶ πέμπτῃ; day of the week;- but ye ὑμεῖς δὲ νηστεύσατε τετράδα shall fast on the fourth day, καὶ παρασκευήν. and the preparation day (Friday). ‘ 2. Μηδὲ προσεύχεσϑε ὡς oí 2 Neither pray ye as the Ux oxpirad, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐκέλευσεν hypocrites, * but as the Lord ὁ Κύριος ev τῷ εὐαγγελίῳ commanded in His Gospel, so αὐτοῦ οὕτως προσεύχεσϑε" pray ye: «Our Father, who * Comp. Matt. vi. 5. Did. Stated fasting soon became a general custom of the Catholic church. See the passages of Barnabas, of Hermas, Tertullian, Clement of Alex., Origen, Epiphanius, quoted by Br. and Ha. Origen says (Homil. x. in Levit.) : ** Habemus quartam et sextam septimana dies, quibus solemniter jejunamus." The Jewish fasts were fixed on Monday and Thursday of the week in com- memoration of Moses' ascent to, and descent from, Mt. Sinai ; the Christian fasts on Wednesday (rerpas, feria quarta) and Friday (παραδκευή, . parasceve, feria sexta) as the days of the Betrayal and Crucifixion of the Lord, with reference to Matt. ix. 15: ‘‘When the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then they will fast." They were called 6racezs, dies stationum, semijejunia. Wednesday dropped gradually out of use as a fast day. After the Council of Elvira, 305, Saturday came to be observed i in the West. These days of fasting, together with the joyous Lord’s Day, mentioned in Ch. XIV., determine the Christian week The death and resurrection of our Lord were the controlling idea of Christian life and Christian worship. But no allusion is made in the Did. to the annual festivals and the ecclesiastical year, which was developed gradually from the same central facts. : παραόπκευῃ) the Jewish designation of Friday, on which preparations were made for the proper observance of the Sabbath. Matt. xxvii. 62; Mark xv. 42; Luke xxiii. 54; John xix. 14, 81, 42. It was also called πῤοόδαββατον (Sabbath eve), Judith viii. 6; Mark xv. 42. The name is retained in the Greek liturgies and in the Latin office. for Good Friday, Feria sexta in Parasceve. 2. As the Lord commanded in His Gospel.] A distinct reference to St. Matthew. The oldest testimony to its existence and use. Our Father, etc.] The first quotation of the Lord's Prayer, and the first testimony to its use as a form in daily devotion. The text is taken from Matthew vi. 5-13 (not from the shorter form of Luke), with three unimpor- tant differences unsupported by MS. authority, viz.: 1) ἐν rà οὐραν ᾧ for the favorite plural of Matthew ; 2) the omission of the article before γῆς, and 8) τὴν ὀφειλὴν for the plural ra ogeíAguara. The other differ- ences are textual. The Did. sustains the textus receptus : 1) in ἐλϑέτω for ἐλθάτω, 2) in ἀφίεμεν (we forgive) instead of ἀφήκαμεν (we have for- given, which is supported by x, *, B, Z, Origen, and preferred by Tischend.,

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. Πάτερ ἡμῶν ὁ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, ἁγιασθήτω τὸ ὄνομα σου, ἐλ- ϑέτω ἡ βασιλεία σου, γεννη- ϑήτω" τὸ ϑέλημα cov ws ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς. τὸν ἄρ- ΤΟΥ ἡμῶν τὸν ἐπιούσιον δὸς ἡμῖν σήμερον, καὶ ἄφες ἡμῖν τὴν ὀφειλὴν ἡμῶν ὡς καὶ ἡ- μεῖς ἀφίεμεν τοῖς ὀφειλέταις ἡμῶν, καὶ μὴ εἰσενέγκῃς ἡμᾶς eis πειρασμόν, ἀλλὰ ῥῦσαι ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ: ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ δύναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. 8. Τρὶς τῆς ἡμέρας οὕτω 189 art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. ‘Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth. Give us this day our daily (need- ful) bread. And forgive us our debt as we also forgive our debtors. And bring us not into temptation, but de- liver us from the evil one (or, from evil). For Thine isthe power and the glory for ever.” ® 3. Pray thus thrice a day. , προσευχεσϑε. * Matt. vi. 9-13. Ἐγενηϑήτω, Br. Hi. W. &oc. Weste. and Hort, and the E. R.) ; and 8) in the insertion of the doxology, though only in part, the βασιλεία and the aunr being omitted. Gregory of Nyssa (as quoted by Tischend. and Hort) has the same form, or: αὐτῷ ἡ δυναμις καὶ ἡ δοξα. The doxology is absent from the oldest MS. and other authorities, and came into the text from liturgical and devotional use, as we can clearly see here. Dr. Hort says: ‘‘ There can be little doubt that the doxology origi- nated in liturgical use in Syria, and was then adopted into the Greek and Syriac-Syrian texts of the N. T. It was probably derived ultimately from 1 Chron. xxix. 11 (Heb.), but, 1t may be, through the medium of some con- temporary Jewish usage: the people’s response to prayers in the temple is said to have been, * Blessed be the name of the glory of his kingdom for ever and ever.'" (Notes on Select Readings, p. 9.) The doxology varies as to length and wording in different texts and liturgies, until from the time of Chrysostom it assumed its traditional form, but in the Latin and Angli- can services the shorter form without the doxology is still alternately used with the other. 8. Thrice a day.] Indicates the beginning of Christian regularity and formalism in devotion, in imitation of the Jewish hours of prayer, Dan. vi. 10 (comp. Ps. lv. 17) ; Acts ii. 1, 15; iii. 1; x. 9. Tertullian (De Orat. xxv. and Dg Jejun. x.) derives from these passages the duty to pray at the third, sixti and ninth hour (?. e. morning, noon, and afternoon or evening), in addition to the ordinary prayers at sunrise and bed-time which need no : admonition. He supposes (De Orat. x.) that these devotions include the | Lord's Prayer (premissa legitima et ordinaria oratione quasi fundamento). j See the note of Ha., p. 27, and the ample quotations of Br. p. 31-38. X ua. mes v ass aee. VM. VA. RS A xs TE - * € NN
