190 DOCUMENT L Keg. S'. Cuap. IX. THE AGAPE AND THE EUCHARIST. 1. Περὶ δὲ τῆς εὐχαριστίας, 1. Now as regards the Eu- οὕτω" εὐχαριστήσατε. charist (the Thank-offering), "οὕτως, B. δα. ΝΟΤΕΒ TO CHAPTER IX. Chs. IX. and X. contain three eucharistic prayers, the oldest known Christian prayers after those in the N. T., with the exception, perhaps, of the intercessory prayer of the Roman church, which is found at the close of the Clementine Epistle to the Corinthians in the complete copy of the Jeru« salem MS. (edited by Bryennios, 1875; see Church History, ii. 228). They furnish, together with the Lord’s Prayer, the elements of a primitive liturgy, and deserve the careful attention of liturgical scholars They correspond to the Jewish Passover eulogiw. They are very remarkable for their brevity, simplicity, and high-toned spirituality, but also for the absence of any allu- sion to the atoning sacrifice of Christ, except perhaps in the mystic meaning of ** the vine of David” and the broken bread. Not even the words of institu- tion, ‘* This is My body,” ** This is My blood," are mentioned, much less is any theory of the real presence intimated or implied. The prayers are too low for the sacrament, and yet too high for an ordinary meal. But we must remember: 1) The brief and fragmentary character of this section, and the - express reference to the extemporaneous effusions of the Prophets which were to follow and to supplement the liturgical forms (X. 7); 2) the designation of the Eucharist as a sacrifice foretold by the Prophets, to be celebrated every Lord's Day (XIV. 3), after a public confession of sin and a reconcilia- tion of brethren at strife (XIV. 1, 2); and, 8) the Johannean phraseology and tone of these prayers, which we have previously pointed out (p. 89 sq.). If we read such expressions as ** spiritual food and drink” (X. 3), ‘eternal life" (IX. 3; X. 8, ‘‘ perfect her in Thy love” (X. 5), in the light of Christ's mysterious discourse after the feeding of the five thousand, and of his Sacer- dotal Prayer. and take them in their full Johannean meaning, there can be no doubt that the author believed in the atonement for sin by the sacrifice of our Lord, of which the Eucharist is the perpetual memorial. B. M.: ‘‘ Ces pri- éres respire un vif sentiment de gratitude pour Dieu et de solidarité avec tous les membres de I’ [;glise, dispersés aux quatre vents du ciel.” He likewise points to the striking resemblance of these prayers to the Sacerdotal Prayer, but derives them from oral tradition rather than from the fourth Gospel. 1. evyapioria] In the N. T.: thankfulness, or thanksgiving, especially also before a meal. The verbs εὐχαριότέω and evAoyéw are used by our Saviour in blessing the bread and the cup at the Last Supper, Matt. xxvi. 27; Luke, xxii. 17, 19; 1 Cor. xi. 24. Hence in post-Apostolic and Patris- tic writers Eucharist was the technical term for the Lord's Supper as a sacrifice of thanksgiving for all the gifts of God, especially for the redemp- tion of Christ. It was usually applied to the whole act of celebration, with or without the Agape, but sometimes also to the consecrated elements, by

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 191 give thanks after this man- ner: 9. Πρῶτον περὶ roD ποτη- 2. First for the cup: piov. Evyapic roD uév σοῖ, ** We give thanks to Thee, Πάτερ ἡμῶν, ὑπὲρ τῆς ἁγίας our Father, for the holy vine ἀμπέλου Δαβὶδ roD παιδὸς of David Thy servant, which cov, ἧς ἐγνώρισας ἡμῖν διὰ thou hast made known to us Ignatius, Justin M., Irenseus, and others. Here it includes the Agape. See the notes of Br., and Suicer, Thesaur. sub εὐλογία. B. Maury (p. 81): ** D/eucharistie est pour notre auteur, à la fois un repas fraternel (car elle est jointe à lagape), une action de gráces pour le bienfait de la revelation de Jesus pour les fruits de la terre et une oblation des ceurs purifié et réconciliés, comme étant le sacrifice le plus agréable ἃ Dieu." 2. First for the cup | For the order see Luke xxii. 17-19; 1 Cor. x. 16. In ver. 5 (‘‘ let no one eat or drink ") the usual order is implied. ὑπὲρ τῆς ἁγίας ἀμπέλου 4afjió] A peculiar expression. It may mean the Christian church, as the true theocracy, the Lord's vineyard ; comp. Ps. Ixxx. 15: ‘‘ the vineyard which thy right hand bath planted ;" Isa. v. 1 sqq.; der. ii. 21; xii. 10. But itis probably a mystic name of Christ, sug- gested by the parable of the Vine, John xv. 1: '* I am the true vine;" comp. Ps. Ixxx. 8: ‘‘Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt ;" and Matt. xxvi. 29: * this fruit of the vine." "This interpretation would imply a reference to the atoning blood. Clement of Alexandria (Quis dives salvus, 29), uses the same expression, probably in view of this passage and with reference to the sacra- ment of the Lord's Supper. * This (Jesus)," he says, ** who poured out for us the wine of the vine of David, that is to say, His blood" (obros 6 róv οἶνον, TO atua ts ἀμπέλου τῆς da fj 6, ἐκχέας ἡμῖν). Br. quotes also another passage from the same author (Pedagogue i. δ): ‘‘ For the vine produces wine as the Word produces blood, and both drink for the health of men ; the wine, for the body, the blood for the spirit” (φέρει ydp οἶνον ἡ ἄμπελος ὡς αἷμα ὁ λόγος, ἄμφω δ' ἀνθρώποις ποτὸν εἰς δωτηρίαν, ὁ μὲν οἶνος τῷ δώματι, τὸ δὲ αἷμα τῷ πνεύματι). The. vine was ἃ favorite symbol of Christ with the early Christians and is often found in the pictures of the Catacombs. Thy servant] παῖς means both son and servant, and is used of Christ by St. Peter four times in Acts iii. 18, 26 ; iv. 27, 80 ; with reference to the servantof Jehovah (nim say) in Isaiah xlii. 1 (quoted by Matt. xii. 18). An indication of the antiquity of the Did. and probably also of a knowl- edge of Acts (but not of Ebionitism ; for Christ is called the Son of God in the baptismal formula, VII. 1, and indirectly in XVI. 4, see note there). The designation was a liturgical form. In the prayer of the Roman church in the first Ep. of Clemens, ch. lix. (recovered by Br. in 1875), Christ is three times called vais and παὶς ἡγναπημένος. Polycarp used it twice in his last prayer, according to the Martyr. Polyc. c. xiv. (Funk, P. Aps. i. 298), . namely, ὁ τοῦ ἀγαπητοῦ xal εὐλογητοῦ mz a:160$ Gov ᾿Ιηδοῦ Xpi6-

192 DOCUMENT L ᾿Ιησοῦ τοῦ παιδός Gov: σοὶ ἡ through Jesus, Thy servant: δόξα εἰς rovs αἰῶνας. to 'Thee be the glory for ever,” 3. Περὶ δὲ τοῦ xAaocyaros 8. And for the broken | bread : EvyapicroDuév σοι, Πάτερ ** We give thanks to Thee, ἡμῶν, ὑπὲρ τῆς Bans καὶ γνῶ- our Father, for the life and σεως, ἧς ἐγνώρισας ἡμῖν διὰ knowledge which Thou hast Ἰησοῦ τοῦ παιδὸς cov: σοὶ ἡ made known to us through δόξα εἰς rovs αἰῶνας. Jesus, Thy servant: to Thee be the glory for ever. 4. Ὥσπερ nv τοῦτο" κλασ- 4. “As this broken bread μα διεσκορπισμένον ἐπανῶ wasscattered upon the moun- τῶν ὁρέων καὶ συναχϑὲν tains and gathered together ἐγένετο ἕν, οὕτω συναχϑήτω became one, so let Thy σου ἡ &xxAgoía ἀπὸ τῶν me- church be gathered together * rj inserted after τοῦτο by v. Gebh. Ha. Z.- roD, and διὰ ἀγαπητοῦ Gov παιδός. It is retained several times in the prayers of the Apost. Const. viii. 5, 14, 39, 40, 41. 8. κλαόμα] A fragment (from κλαίω, to break), the broken bread of the Agape and the Eucharist. The noun (in the plural) is so used in the accounts of the miraculous feeding (Matt. xiv. 20 ; Mark vi. 48; viii. 19, 20; John vi. 12, 18), and the verb κλάόδαι τὸν ἄρτον, of the Agape and the Lord's Supper (Matt. xxvi. 26 ; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxii. 19; Acts ii. 46; xx. 7, 11; 1 Cor. x. 16). Metaphorically, it designates the body of Christ, as broken really on the cross and typically in the Eucharist, 1 Cor. xi. 24: τὸ δῶμα τὸ ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν κλώμενον (tex. rec. and in margin of R. V.). ** The breaking of bread” (7 πλάσις τοῦ ἄρτου) was an apostolic term for the Agape and the Lord's Supper combined, Acts ii. 42. 4. Scattered (in grains) upon the mountains, or, hills.] Entirely inapplic- able to Egypt, and hence omitted in the Egyptian prayer quoted below, but quite appropriate in a hilly country like Syria and Palestine, where the Did. originated. Gathered together, became one.] The idea was probably suggested by 1 Cor. x. 17, where Paul, with reference to the communion, says: ** We, who are many, are one bread, one body: for we all partake of the one bread." Ireneus (Adv. Her. iv. 18, 5) speaks of ‘‘the bread which is produced from the earth (ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἄρτος), when it receives the invocation of God, is no lenger common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two realities, earthly and heavenly." Let Thy church be gathered together into Thy kingdom.] An important distinction between the ἐκκλησία and the βασιλεία, which occurs again in the third prayer, X. 5. The Church is a training-school for the kingdom

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES, 198 ράτων τῆς γῆς eis τὴν σὴν Ba- from the ends of the earth ciÀAéiav: Ori σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ δοξα into Thy kingdom, for Thine καὶ ἡ δύναμις διὰ Ἰησοῦ Xpio- is the glory and the power τοῦ εἰς TOUS αἰῶνας. through Jesus Christ for ever.” 5. Μηδεὶς δὲ φαγέτω μηδὲ ὅ. But let no one eat or πιέτω απὸ τῆς εὐχαριστίας drink of your Eucharist, ex- ὑμῶν, αλλ᾽ oí βαπτισϑέντες cept those baptized into the eis ὄνομα Κυρίου: xai yap name of the Lord; for as ro- περὶ rovrov εἴρηκεν ὁ KU- gards this also the Lord has of God. The Church is manifold and will pass away with its various organi- zations; the kingdom is one and will last forever, now as & kingdom of grace, then as a kingdom of glory. This distinction was obscured in the Roman church, which identifies herself with the church catholic, and the church with the kingdom. It was measurably restored by the Protestant distinction between the visible and invisible church. The difference is very apparent in the parables which illustrate the kingdom, and in such passages as ‘‘to them (to the poor in spirit, to the children) belongs the kingdom of heaven; ‘‘ to enter the kingdom " (Matt. v. 3; xviii. 8, 4; Mark, x. 14; John, iii’ 5), or ‘‘ the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost" (Rom. xiv. 17). In such cases it would be improper to substitute **the church." It is significant that Christ uses ἐκκλησία only twice (in Matthew and nowhere else), but βασιλεία (with τῶν οὐρανῶν or Tov StoU) twenty-three times in Matthew alone. The eschatological aim of this prayer is remarkable and was suggested by Matt. xxvi. 29, and 1 Cor. xi. 26 (^till He come"), ‘‘ Es ist,” says Ha., ‘‘ der hóch- sten Beachtung werth, dass der Verfasser im AbendmaM eine eschatologische Allegorie gefunden hat, die [uns] sonst nirgends begegnet." From the ends of the earth.| Comp. X. 5, ** from the four winds." Matt. xxiv. 81: ‘‘they [the angels] shall gather together His elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." b. Hacept those baptized.] The communion is for baptized believers, and for them only. Baptism is the sacramental sign and seal of regeneration and conversion; the Lord's Supper is the sacrament of sanctification and growth in spiritual life. Justin Martyr (Apol. I. c. lxvi.) says: ‘This food is called among us the Eucharist (eU yap:6rza), of which no one is allowed to partake but he who believes that the things which are taught by us are true, and who has been washed with the washing that is for the remission of sins and unto regeneration, and who is so living as Christ has delivered. For not as common bread and common drink (ὡς κοινὸν ἄρτον οὐδὲ κοινὸν πόμα) do we receive these [elements]." In the second century the divine service was sharply divided into two parts, the service of the catechumens (missa catechumenorum) and the service of the faithful (missa fidelium). Hence the Ap. Const., vii. 25, lay great stress on the exclusion of unbe- lievers from the Eucharist.
