194 DOCUMENT I. pios Μὴ δῶτε τὸ ἅγιον rois said: ** Give not that which xvot. is holy to the dogs.” *. Keg. τ. CHAP. X. \ PosT-CoMMUNION PRAYER. 1. Mera δὲ τὸ ἐμπλησθῆναι 1. Now after being filled, οὕτως ELYAPLOTNHOATE: give thanks after this manner: * Matt. vii. 6. Give not. etc.] A justifiable application of the warning of Christ, Matt. vii. 6. Ha. aptly quotes Tertullian, De Prascer., xli., who says of the services of the heretics that they throw ** sanctum canibus et porcis margaritas." A remarkable parallel prayer to the thanksgiving for the bread, to which Dr. Swainson first called attention, and which is quoted also by De Romes- tin (p. 100), is found in Pseudo- Athanasius De Virginitate, s. De Ascest, S 13 (Athan. Opera ed. Migne. iv. 266, in Tom. xxviii. of his ‘‘ Patrol. Gr.”). Here the virgin is directed ** órav κατεδϑῇς ἐπὶ τῆς τραπέζης καὶ ἐρχῇ κλᾶδσαι TOV ἄρτον... εὐχαριστοῦσα λέγε, εὐχαριότοῦμέν Got, Πά- rtp ἡμὼν, ὑπὲρ τῆς ἁγίας avadracews δου, διὰ γὰρ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ παιδὸς Gov ἐγνωώριδας ἡμὶν αὐτήν, καὶ xa9 ds ὁ ἄρτος οὗτος SrECKON ALGO MEVOS ὑπῆρχεν ὁ ἐπανω ταύτης τῆς τραπέζης καὶ δνυναχϑεὶς ἐγένετο ἕν, οὕτως ἐπιόδυναχ- ϑήτω Gov ἡ ἐκκληδία ἀπὸ τῶν περάτων THS γῆς eis τὴν βαδιλείαν Gov, ort Gov ἐόστὶν. ἡ δυναμις καὶ ἡ δόξα εἰς τους αἰῶνας. ἀμήν." The words ἐπάνω τῶν ὁρέων, * upon the hills," so inapplicable to Egypt, are omitted after διεόκορπιόμέ- vos. NorEes TO CHAPTER X. Ch. X. contains the post-communion prayer. Like all similar prayers of later times, it consists of two parts, thanksgiving and intercession. It fol. lows in this respect Jewish precedent. The prayer after drinking the Hallel eup at the Passover reads thus: ‘‘ Blessed be Thou, O Lord our God, King of the world, for the vine and the fruit of the vine, and for the harvest of the field, and for the glorious, good and roomy land which Thou didst give to our fathers in Thy good pleasure, that they might eat of its fruit and be satisfled by its bounty. Have mercy, O Lord our God, upon us and upon Israel, Thy people, and upon Jerusalem, Thy city [and upon Thine altar and Thy temple ; and build Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily in our days, and bring us thither and make us rejoice in her, that we may eat of her fruit - and be satisfied with her bounty, and praise Thee in holiness and purity ; and refresh us on this festive day of unleavened bread]; for Thou, O Lord, art good and doest good to all [so shall we thank Thee for the land and for the fruit of the vine]. Blessed be Thou, O Lord, for the land and its fruits, for ever, Amen." The bracketed sentences seem to presuppose the second destruction of Jerusalem, and are omitted in an Oxford MS. of the twelfth century. See G. Bickell, Messe und Pascha, Mainz, 1872, and the Innsbruck * Zeitschrift für kath. Theol.” 1880, 90-112. 1. uera δὲ τὸ ἐμπλησϑῆναι)] Changed by the Ap. Const. into uera

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 2. Evxapirobuev got, Πα- TEP ἅγιε, ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἁγίου Ovo- patos σου, OU κατεσκήνωσας ἐν ταῖς καρδίαις ὑμῶν " καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς γνώσεως καὶ πίστε- ως καὶ ἀϑανασίας, ἧς ἐγν ὥρι- σας ἡμῖν διὰ Ἰησοῦ τοῦ zai- δός σου: σοὶ ἡ δοξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. 8. Σύ, δέσποτα ,παντοκρά- TOP, ἔκτισας ra πάντα ἕνεκεν τοῦ ὀνόματός σου, τροφήν τε καὶ ποτὸν ἔδωκας τοῖς avSpa- 195 2. ** We thank Thee, Holy Father, for Thy holy Name, which Thou hast caused to dwell (tabernacle) in our hearts, and for the knowledge and faith and immortality which Thou hast made known to us through Jesus Thy Servant, to Thee.be the glory for ever. 3. **Thou, O, Almighty Sovereign, didst make all things for Thy Name's sake; Thou gavest food and drink mois εἰς ἀπόλαυσιν ἵνα oot εὐχαριστήσωσιν, ἡμῖν δὲ ἔχα- ρίσω πνευματικὴν τροφὴν καὶ to men for enjoyment that they might give thanks to Thee ; but to us Thou didst * ἡμῶν, Br. &c. μετάληψιν, after partaking of the communion. But the Did. must mean a regular meal, the Agape then still being connected with the sacramental celebration, as in the church at Corinth (1 Cor. xt. 20-22) ; it was separated in the timeof the younger Pliny and Justin Martyr. John (vi. 12) uses the phrase ὡς δὲ &vezA:6356av, ** when they were filled," of the feeding of the five thousand. 2. Holy Father] The same address in the Sacerdotal Prayer, John xvii. 11, but nowhere else. God is next addressed as ** Almighty Sovereign " (ver. 8) and last as ‘‘ Lord," (ver. 8.) These terms correspond, as Ha. points out, to the three divisions of the prayer: 1) thanks for the revelation and redemption through Christ, 2) thanks for the creation and spiritual food and drink and eternal life through Christ, 3) intercession for the church of God. A similar division in Justin M. Apol., i. LXV. Caused to dwell] xatracdunvow, to pitch tent, to encamp, has here the transitive sense as in the Sept. Ps. xxii. 2; 2 Chr. vi. 2. The simple verb is & favorite term of St. John, who uses it intransitively with reference to the Shekina, the indwelling of Jehovah in the Holy of Holies ; comp. John i, 14 ἐδκηνωσεν iv ἡμῖν); Apoc. xxi. 8 (όκην ὦὧδαι μετ᾽ avrav). 8. Almighty Sovereign] or Ruler. παντοκράτωρ, in the Sept., often in the Apoc., and in 2 Cor. vi. 18 (in a quotation from the Sept.). Introduced into the Apostles’ Creed: z:6revo εἰς Sedv παντοκράτορα, Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem. On δεόποτης see the note of Hitchcock, p. 51.

196 DOCUMENT I. ποτὸν xal δωὴν αἰώνιον Sia freely give spiritual food τοῦ παιδός σου. and drink and eternal life through Thy servant. 4. Πρὸ πάντων εὐχαρισ- 4, ** Before all things we τοῦμέν σοι ὅτι δυνατὸς εἶ give thanks to Thee that σύ} ἡ δόξα εἰς rovs αἰῶνας. Thou art mighty; to Thee be the glory for ever. 5. Μνήσϑητι, Κύριε, τῆς ἐκ-- ὅ. “Remember, O Lord, κλησίας σου τοῦ ῥύσασθαι Thy Church to deliver her αὐτὴν ano παντὸς πονήρου from all evil and to perfect καὶ τελειῶσαι αὐτὴν EV τῇ her in Thy love ; and gather ἀγάπῃ σου, καὶ σύναξον av- her together from the four τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν τεσσάρων ἀνέ- winds,* sanctified for Thy μὼν τὴν ayiuxcSeiaav εἰς τὴν kingdom which Thou didst σὴν βασιλείαν, ἣν ἡτοίμασας prepare for her; for Thine * Matt. xxiv. 31. * Got, substituted for 6v by Br. Hi. Z. Goz inserted after Gv by Ha. Spiritual food and drink, etc.] . A spiritual conception of the Eucharist based on the Lord's discourse on the bread of life, John vi. 35 sqq. Ignatius and Justin Martyr first suggested a strongly realistic conception, which ter- minated at last in the dogma of transubstantiation. Ignatius (Ad Ephes. xx.) calls the Eucharist a medicine of immortality (papuanxov ἀϑανασίας) and an antidote against death. Justin M. speaks of a change (μεταβολῇ) of the elements. But the African and Alexandrian fathers favored a spirit- ual conception till the time of Augustin, who was the chief authority foz that view (afterwards advocated by Ratramnus and Berengar, but forced to give way to transubstantiation). Deliver her from every evil] Comp. John xvii. 15, and Matt. vi. 18 (656a ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ). 5. τελειῶσαι ἀυτὴν ἐν τῇ ἀγάπῃ Gov.] A peculiarly Johannean expression. Comp. John xvii. 23 (iva ὦσιν τετελειωμένοι ets Ev); 1 John ii. 5; ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ Seovd rertActorar); iv. 19-18 (ἡ τελεία ay a). Τὴν ἁγιαόϑ eia] sanctified by the sacrifice of Christ ; comp. John xvii. 19: ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἐγὼ dyiato ἐμαυτόν, iva c1 xal ἀυτοὶ ἡγιασμένοι ἐν ἀληϑ εἴᾳ, and Heb. x. 10: ἡγτιαόμένοι ἐδμὲν 61d τῆς προσφορᾶς τοῦ δώματος Ἰηδοῦ Χρίστοῦ ἐφάμαξ. Ha. inserts a comma after ἐγιασϑ εἴ- 6av,&nd connects εἰς τὴν δὴν Bad. with the verb óvva£tov. Br. omits the comma and explains: **sanctifled in order to inherit the kingdom.” So also B. M.: ‘elle qui a été sanctifiée en vue de ton royaume que tu lui a pré- pare.” GSa.: '* aprés l'uvoir sanctifiée, pour ton royaume," etc. Which Thou didst prepare for her.] This includes the doctrine of fore- ordination. Comp. Matt. xxv. 34, xAgpovoyu5óars τὴν ἡτοιμαόμένην

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 197 αὐτῇ ὅτι σοῦ ἐστιν ἡ Óvva- is the power and the glory μιξ xal ἡ δοξα eis τοὺς αἰῶ- for ever. γας. | 6. EASÉro χαρις xal maped- 6. *« Let grace come, and Sér@ ὁ κόσμος οὗτος. ‘Os let this world pass away.* avvat τῷ Seg) * Δαβίδ. Ei Hosanna to the God (Son) of τις ἅγιός ἐστιν, ἐρχέσϑω: εἴ David. If any one is holy τις οὐκ ἔστι, μετανοείτω' μα- let him come, if any one is pavaSa: ᾿Αμήν. not holy let him repent. Ma- ' ranatha. Amen." * Comp. 1 Cor. vii. 81. 51 Cor xvi. 22. *'Q6avva, Br Hi. Ha. W. tvío, Br. Hi. W. H. & B. Sp., but Ha. R. retain Sea. ὑμῖν βασιλείαν ἀπὸ καταβολῇς xoóuov. On the distinction between the church and the kingdom see note on IX. 4. 6. Let grace come, etc.] Or, to retain the paronomasia : ‘‘ Let grace ap- pear, and let the world disappear." Comp. 1 Cor. vii. 81: ‘‘ the fashion of this world passeth away." éASér@ y« 725 must be explained in the eschata- logical sense of the grace of the second coming; comp. 1 Pet. i. 18 (τὴν χάριν ἐν ἀποκαλύψει Ἰησοῦ Xp.); and Apoc. xxii 17,20. Hence the conjecture of Potwin, Χριότος for xup:s, is unnecessary. The opposite anti- millennarian tendency and the mighty missionary impulse of the Church led afterwards to pray for the delay of the end of the word, as Tertullian, con- trary to his own millennarian views, records in Apol. c. xxxix.: ' oramus pro mora finis." See Ha., p. 85. To the God of David.] A strong testimony for the author's belief in the divinity of Christ, to whom it must refer in connection with his coming here spoken of. It may be traced back to our Lord's interpretation of the Messianic Ps. cx. 1 (‘‘The Lord said unto my Lord") in Matt. xxii. 429-46. Br. and Hi. conjecture σῷ υἱῷ, for τῷ Sew, to conform the pas- sage to Matt. xxi. 9, 15: ** Hosanna to the Son of David." But Ha. de- fends the reading of the MS. with six arguments. There arose an early prejudice against the designation of Christ as David's Son ; Barnabas calls it an ** error of the sinners,” and substitutes for it **the Lord of David." It is much easier to account for the change of S¢@ into υἱῷ than vice versa. Let him repent.] Here, according to liturgical usage, would be the place for the communion ; but as this was indicated at the close of the preceding prayers (IX. 5), we must understand this as an invitation to catechumens and unbelievers to join the Church. There was at the time not yet a strict sep- aration of the two parts of the service, the missa catechumenorum and the missa, fidelium, as in the third century. In some American churches it is customary to exhort the non-communicants after the communion to repent and to unite with God's people. Br. explains: ‘‘ Let the saints come to meet the Lord. As many as are unbelievers, and not yet washed in the laver of
