198 ^ poCUMENT I. "7. Τοῖς δὲ προφήταις ἐπι- — "l. But permit the Prophets rpímere ευχαριστεῖν ὅσα SÉ- to give thanks aa much as [in λουσιν. what words] they wish. Keg. 1a. Cuap. XI. APOSTLES AND PROPHETS. 1. Ὃς av οὖν ἐλϑὼν διδάξῃ 1. Whosoever then comes grace, or who have fallen away, let them repent. May the Lord come and hiskingdom." Ha.: '*.Das épyé63@ bezieht sich auf den Zutritt zu der ver- sammelten, auf iren Herrn wartenden Gemeinde ; an die spdtere, dhnlich lautende Formel in Bezug auf den Zutritt zum Genuss der heil. Speitse, rst nicht zudenken." Maran-atha] Aramean (ANN 19), ἡ. e., the Lord cometh (κύριος ἔρχε- ταῦ) ; comp. 1 Cor. xvi. 22, where the same word occurs, and Apoc. xxii. 20: ** Amen: come, Lord Jesus” (ἔρχου, κυριε Ἰηδοῦ). The word was a re- minder of the second coming, perhaps ‘‘ a mysterious pass-word of the early Christians" (Bisping). Harnack: ‘‘ Man beachte, wie dieses uralte, dra- matisch aufgebaute Stossgebet (vota. suspirantia, sagt Tertullian) die Gemeinde achliesslich in den Moment der Wiederkunft Christi versetzt ; so lebendig war die Hoffnung auf die Nahe derselben." Sabatier: ‘‘ Le cri de Maranatha annonce la venue du Seigneur, non dans les espéces consacrées, mais son retour glorieuz sur les nuées du ciel." Field (in his Otium Norvicense, Pars tertia, a criticism of the Revised N. T., 1881. p. 110), renders the Syriae Moran etho: **Our Lord came," or rather **Our Lord is come" (not ‘‘ cometh ᾽ν, since the Syriac verb represents either 71.9 ¢ (Jude, ver. 14), or ἥκει (Luke xv. 27; 1John v. 20) ‘‘ Accordingly Theodoret and Schol. Cod. 7, explain the word to mean ὁ κύριος 7ÀS&v; Schol. Cod. 19, ὁ κύριος παραγέγονεν; and Schol. Cod. 46, ὁ κύριος nuay net.” 7. Permit the Prophets.] The whole congregation is addressed as having control over this matter. The liberty of extemporaneous prayer combined with liturgical forms. First, full liberty for all to pray in public meeting, 1 Cor. xiv. 29, 81 ; then restriction of liberty to the prophets, as here ; at last prohibition of free prayer. Justin Martyr, whom Br. aptly quotes, accords the same freedom to the presiding minister, or bishop (Apol. i. lxvii): ** When our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and the President (ὁ mpoeo6ras) in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings according to his ability (667 δύναμις avra@).” The people were to respond, * Amen." Clement of Rome, like Paul, warns the Corinthians against dis- order and confusion, Ad. Cor. cap. xli. : ‘‘ Let each of you, brethren, in his own order give thanks unto God (ἐν rà ἐδίω τάγματι εὐχαριδτείτω ro Sec), maintaining a good conscience and not transgressing the appointed rule of his service (σὸν ὡριόμένον τῆς λειτουργίας αὐτοῦ xaovova) but acting with all seemliness." Ha.: ‘‘ Zn der Did. gelten die Propheten als die Virtuosen des Gebete." Notes To CHAPTER XI. Here begins the directory of discipline and the officers of the Church, Chs. XI.-XIIL, and Ch. XV. See the general discussion, pp. 62 sqq.

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. ὑμᾶς ταῦτα παντα τὰ προει- Ld d 3 / pupéva, δεέξασϑε avrov: ? ? 4 9. Ἐὰν δὲ αὐτὸς ὁ διδασ- ’ » xcv στραφεὶς διδασκῃ ἄλλην διδαχὴν εἰς τὸ καταλῦσαι, μὴ αὐτοῦ ἀκούσητε: εἰς δὲ τὸ προσϑεῖναι δικαιοσύνην καὶ γνῶσιν Κυρίου, δέξασϑε av- τὸν ὡς Κυριὸν. 8. Περὶ δὲ τῶν ἀποστόλων καὶ προφητῶν κατὰ τὸ δόγμα τοῦ εὐἀάγγελίου οὕτως ποι- ἤσατε. 4. Πᾶς δὲ ἀπόστολος ἐρχό- μενος πρὸς ὑμᾶς δεχϑήτω ὡς Κύριος. ἃ Matt. x. 2. Hear him not.] 2John 10: 199 and teaches you all the things aforesaid, receive him. 2. But if the teacher him- self being perverted teaches another teaching to the de- struction [of this], hear him not, but if [he teach] to the increase of righteovsness and the knowledge of the Lord, receive him as the Lord. 3. Now with regard to the Apostles and Prophets, ac- cording to the decree (com- mand) of the gospel, so do ye. 4, Let every Apostle that cometh to you be received as the Lord.* 40. “Ἢ any one cometh unto you, and bringeth not this teaching, receive him not into your house.” Receive him as the Lord.] Matt. x. 40: ‘‘ He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth Him that sent me." Br. quotes also Ignatius, Ad. Eph. vi. John xiii. 20. 8. Aposties and Prophets.| The first order of ministers whose field is the world. They have their commission directly from the Lord : while Bishops and Deacons are elected by the congregation, XV. 1. The decree of the Gospel.] The directions of Christ in sending out the Twelve and the Seventy, Matt. x. 5-12 ; Luke ix. 1-6; x, 4-21. δόγμα in the sense of decree, ordinance, as in Luke ii. 1; Acts xvi. 4; xvii. 7; Eph. ii. 15. 4. Apostic.] In a wider and secondary sense ; as in Acts xiv. 4, 14; Rom. xvi. 7 ; 1 Cor. xv. 5, 7; 1 Thess. ii. 6. A wandering evangelist or itinerant preacher who carries the Gospel to the unconverted, and is there- fore not allowed to remain in one place. See the description of this class of ministers in Euseb. H. E. iii. 87, quoted on p. 68. Hermas uses the term likewise in the wider sense and speaks of forty Apostles and Teachers, Simil. ix. 15, 16, 17, 25; Vis. itt. 5. The Did. cannot mean the original Twelve and Paul, for to them the restriction of ver. 5 would not apply (Paul sojourned three years in Ephesus, and eighteen months, and again threo months in Corinth) It is ἃ second and weaker generation. An indication that the book was written after A.D. 70. According to Mommsen, in Corpus Inscript. Lat., Tom. ix. num. 648 (Berol. 1883), the Jews used the term ‘* Apostle " till the sixth century for a special class of officials. This is con- *

200 5. Ov * μενεῖ δὲ ἡμέραν μί- αν, ἐὰν δὲ ἦ χρεία, καὶ τὴν ἄλλην, τρεῖς δὲ ἐὰν μείνῃ, φευδοπροφήτης ἐστίν. 6. Ἐξερχόμενος δὲ ὁ ἀπόσ- τολος μηδὲν λαμβανέτω εἰ μὴ ἄρτον ἕως οὗ αὐλισϑῇ: ἐὰν δὲ ἀργύριον αἰτῇ, φψευδοπροφή- της ἐστί. , 4 7. Kat zavra προφήτην Aa- . ^ , , ? , AoDvra EV NVEVUATI OV πειρα- DOCUMENT I. 5. But he shall not remain [longer than] one day ; and, if need be, another [day] also ; but if he remain three [days] he is a false prophet. 6. And when the Apostle departeth, let him take noth- ing except bread [enough] till he reach his lodging (night-quarters). But if he ask for money, he is a false prophet. 7. And every prophet who speaks in the spirit ye shall * ov, om. Hi.; οὐ μενεὶ δὲ & μὴ, Ha.; ov, with μενέτω: ‘when he makes a stay, let him do it for one day (only)," Zahn. firmed by the Theodosian Code (Lib. xvi. Tit. viii, Lex 14), which speaks of Jewish Presbyters and those ‘‘ quos ipsi Apostolos vocant." 5. Not longer than one day.] The Jerus. MS. is here evidently defective. Hi. omits ov, Ha. inserts eZ 47 (comp. XII. 2), Z. changes ov into ov and supplies wevéra (where he makes a stay, let him stay only for a day). Three days.| Two or three days of hospitality are granted to every way- faring Christian brother, XII. 2, but to an Apostle only one or two days. This restriction indicates a frequent abuse of the Apostolic or Evangelistic office for purposes of gain. Lucian's historical novel Peregrinus Proteua, in which he ridicules both the Cynic philosophy and the Christian religion, furnishes a commentary. A false Prophet.| Here equivalent for false Apostle. False Apostles are mentioned 2 Cor. xi. 18; Rev. ii. 2, 20; false Prophets, Matt. vii. 15; xxiv. 11; Mark xiii. 22; Luke vi. 26; 2 Pet. ii. 1; 1 John iv. 1. Ha. quotes Ter- tulian De Preser. iv.: **Qui pseudo-prophete sunt, nisi falsi predica- tores? Qui pseudo-apostoli nisi adulteri evangelisatores ? " Hermas, in the Eleventh Commandment, draws from experience an inter- esting comparison between true and false Prophets. The true Prophet, he says, is ‘‘ gentle, quiet, humble, and abstains from all wickedness and frcm the vain desire of this world, and makes himself the poorest of all men;” while the false Prophet ‘‘ exalts himself, is hasty, shameless, talkative, and takes hire for his prophecy.” Comp. the notes of Ha. and the art. of Bon- wetsch, Die Prophetie 1m apost. und nach apost. Zeitalter, quoted p. 148. 6. Comp. Matt. x. 9, 10; Mark vi. 8; Luke ix. 3. 7. Speaks in (the) spirit.) ἐν πνεύματι, without the article, in distinction from ἐν voi, that is in ecstasy, or in a highly exalted state of mind when it is the organ of the Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. xii. 8; xiv. 2; Rev. i. 10; iv. 2

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 201 gere ουδέ Ota xpiverre: πᾶσα γὰρ ἁμαρτία ἀφεϑήσεται, aU- τῇ δὲ ἡ ἁμαρτία ovx ἀφεϑή- δσεταῖ. 8. Οὐ πᾶς δὲ ὁ λαλῶν ἐν πνεύματι προφήτης ἐστίν, αλλ ἐὰν ἔχῃ τοὺς τρόπους Κυ- píov. Απὸ οὖν τῶν τρόπων γγνωσϑήσεται ὁ φευδοπροφή- της καὶ ὁ προφήτης. 9, Καὶ πᾶς προφήτης ὁ ρί- Gor * τράπεδαν εν πνεύματι οὐ φάγεται am αὐτῆς, εἰδὲ μήγε φευδ οπροφητης ἐστί. 10. Ies δὲ προφήτης διδάσ- κῶν τὴν ἀλήϑειαν, εἰ ἃ δι- δάσπει οὐ ποιεῖ, ψευδοπροφή- TNS ἐστί. 11. Πᾶς δὲ προφήτης δεδο- κιμασμένος aAgSivós ποιῶν + εἰς μυστήριον κοσμικονῖ Ex- * ὁρίζων, Br. et al. ἐπκοόσμικῶν, Hi., xoGuz0v, Petersen ; This sin shall not be forgiven.] Matt. xii. 81: not try nor prove ; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this sin shall not be forgiven. 8. Not every one that speaks in the spirit is a Pro- phet, but only if he has the behavior (the ways) of the Lord. By their behavior then shall the false prophet and the [true] Prophet be known. 9. And no Prophet that or- ders a table in the spirit eats of it [himself], unless he is a false prophet. 10. And every Prophet who teaches the truth if he does not practice what he teaches, is a false prophet. 11, And every approved, genuine Prophet, who makes assemblies for a worldly mys- tuvór, Hi. ποιῶν μυόδτ. xo6u. εἰς ἐκκλ. Z. * Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men ; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven." 8. Conformity to the Lord's example is the criterion of a true Prophet. ** By their fruits ye shall know them." Comp. Matt. vii. 15-23. 9. Order atadble.| A love-feast ordered in ecstasy. A strange fact not men- tioned elsewhere. The true Prophet will not profane a sacred ordinance to personal uses by making a meal of the Eucharist. Gordon proposes a different reading, ὁ ῥέζων, ‘who is offering.” ῥέξω is a rare poetic word occurring in Homer and Hesiod, in the sense to perform a sacrifice. 11. xoóuixov.] Belonging to this world (in a local, not in a moral sense), mundane, worldly or earthly, as opposed to ἐπουράνιον, heavenly; comp. Heb. ix. 1, where the tabernacle is called rd ἅγιον xo6uixor, the sanctu- ary of this world, as distinct from the sanctuary in heaven. Hebrew it was used as a substantive. In Rabbinical ποιῶν εἰς μυστήριον xo6uixóv ἐκκλησίας. The most difficult passage in the Did. and not yet satisfactorily explained. Br. admits that it is \\

— 202 DOCUMENT L κλησίας, μὴ διδάσκων δὲ ποι- tery [?], but does not teach eiv ὅσα avros ποιεῖ, οὐ xpi. [others] to do what he him- ϑήσεται ἐφ᾽ ὑμῶν: uera Θεοῦ self does, shall not be judged obscure and indistinct (6xoréezy dv xai &6aqés), and proposes his explanation with diffidence (p. 44). ποιῶν seems to require an object; éxxAnoias may be the plural accusative depending on ποσῶν, or the singular genitive depending on uvórzptov. The earthly mystery may be the Church itself in this world, as the Gospel is called a mystery (Rom. xvi. 25, 26). For the absence of the article in the latter case, comp. Heb. ii. 12 (cv μέσῳ éxxA.) and 8 John 6.—Different renderings: Fa.: who makes assemblies Sor a mystery of this world. H. and B.: acting with a view to the mystery of the church on earth. St.: dealing with reference to the mystery of the church here below. H. and N.: working into the mystery of the church in the world. O.: with a view to the world-mystery of the church. Sp.: who summons assemblies for the purpose of showing an earthly mystery. W.: der Versammlungen zu einem Geheimniss vor der Welt macht. Ha.: der im Hinblick auf das irdische Geheimniss der Kirche handelt. Z,: wenn er eine aymbolische Handlung welticher Art volizieht. Kr.: wenn er in Bezug auf die Ehe die etwas Weltliches und doch in der Kirche (nach Eph. V. 32) etwas Geheimnissvolles ist, für seine Person starke Dinge leistet (durch Verheira- thung und Wiederverheirathung). B.-M,: exergant son corps (9) en vue du mystére terrestre de l'église (sans imposer aux autres ses pratiques ascétiques). Sa.: travaillant au mystére terrestre de l'église. Hi. changes the reading ποιῶν into uvGàv,and κοόμικόν into κοσμικῶν, ‘ initians in mysterium secularium ecclesias" (with reference to the Gnostic and Montanistic distinc- tion between psychical or secular, and pneumatic or spiritual churches, but has found no response. Petersen (p. 8) proposes κοόμιον, chaste, in oppo- sition to the unchaste mysteries of the heathen; likewise without response. Interpretations: (1) Br., Z., Fa., R., Sp.: symbolical actions like those of Isaiah (xx. 2, 4), Jeremiah (xix. 1; xxvii. 2; xxviii. 10), Ezekiel (iv. 12-v. 3), Hosea (i. 2 sqq., Agabus (Acts xi. 28; xxi. 11). Br.: ἐκιλησιάζων τὸν * 4 ~ » ’ 9 * 3 . “λαὸν εἰς ro ἐπιδεῖξαι αὐτῷ ἔργον Gvufodwmov ὁ αὐτὸς ἐργάζεται ἐπὶ παρακλήδει καὶ νουϑεδίᾳ τῶν πιότῶν. The Prophet would at times perform a striking and exciting symbolic action, like the old Prophets; but in all these dramatic shows there was grave danger of vanity and impo- sition for the sake of gain. Hence the author, while permitting such excep- tional exhibitions, guards against abuse by insisting that the Prophet should receive no pay, and not teach others to perform like acts. (2) Ha.: absti- nence from marriage. He refers to Eph. v. 32, Ignatius, Ad Polyc. v., and Tertullian, De Monog., xi., which recommend celibacy as being more consist- ent with a perfect Christian than marriage. But this is far-fetched, and by the great mystery Paul does not mean celibacy, but marriage or rather the union of Christ with his church. Besides celibacy needed no apology in view of the ascetie tendency which set in very early in opposition to the bottom- less sexual depravity of the heathen world. (3) Krawutzcky (in his second article, 7. c., p. 581, note) takes the very opposite view, that the Did. allows —

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 208 yap ἔχει τὴν κρίσιν" ὡσαύ- by you ; for he has his judg- τῶς yap ἐποίησαν καὶ ot ap- ment with God (or, his judg- xaioi προφῆται. ment is in the hands of God); for so did also the ancient Prophets. 12. Ὃς δ᾽ av εἴπῃ ἐν πνεύ- 19. But whosoever says in ματι 40s μοι ἀργύρια 7 ére- the spirit: Give me money pa τινα, οὐκ ἀκούσεσϑε av- or any other thing, ye shall τοῦ" ἐᾶν δὲ περὶ ἄλλων voc- not listen to him ; but if he the Prophets to marry and even to remarry, after the example of some of the Hebrew Prophets, provided only they do not teach others to imitate their ex- ample. He refersto the case of Hos. i. 2; iii. 1; but this marriage to an adulteress is probably to be understood figuratively. (4) E. B. Birks (in ** The Guardian” for June 11, 1884): * making garniture of a church for a sacramental celebration.” Prophets may make shrines or altars for the cele- bration of the Eucharist so long as they do not encourage others in set- ting up separate conventicles, (5) Hicks in “ The Guardian,” approved by E. Venables in ‘‘ The British Quart. Rev.” for May, 1885 (p. 853): calling assemblies of the church for the purpose of revealing future events in the world's history, as were foretold by Agabus (Acts xi. 28), or impending judgments on the enemies of the church. Such predictions might provoke disloyalty to the civil government. This gives very good sense. (6) Gordon: ' doing with an eye to the church’s mystery in the world," i.e., the hidden potency of the Kingdom of God on earth. (7) Sabatier identifies the mys- tery of the Church with the mystery of the Gospel, Eph. vi 19, and contrasts it with the mystery of iniquity, 2 Thess. ii. 7. *' Annoncer 7 Evangile, c cat hater la venue des temps, c'est aider le mystére terrestre dc l Église" (comp. Apoc. x. 7: “then is finished the mystery of God, according to the good tidings which he declared to his servants the prophets"). —I venture, modestly, to suggest two more interpretations. (8) "The earthly mystery of the church” is the sacrament or the sacrifice of the Eucharist, which in the Greek church is emphatically called μυστήριον (comp. Eph. v. 32). This might be supported by the connection with ‘‘the ordering a table” just spoken of (XI 9), and with Chs. IX. and X. and XIV., all of which treat of the Eucharistic sacrifice; but it does not suit the last clause of the verse. (9) The observance of the ceremonial law, or the bearing of the whole yoke; comp. VI. 2 and the note there. Upon the whole, however, the interpreta- tion of Br. is, perhaps, the least objectionable, and next to it that of Hicks. The ancient Prophets] of the Old Testament. Symbolic actions are re- ported of several of them, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea. The reference to the Hebrew Prophets is natural, and it is necessary if we assign the Did. to the first century. Ha. and Hi., who date it from the middle of the second century, understand the early Christian Prophets, as Agabus, the daughters of Philip, Judas, Silas. Quadratus. But they could hardly be called apyaioz even then without distinguishing them from the still older Hebrew Prophets. [ —
