| | | 204 τερούντων εἴπῃ δοῦναι, μη- δεὶς αὐτὸν κρινέτω. Κεφ. ιβ΄. 1. Πᾶς δὲ ὁ ἐρχόμενος ἐν ὀνόματι Κυρίου δεχϑήτω, ἔπειτα δὲ δοκιμάσαντες av- Tov γνώσεσϑε, σύνεσιν yap eGerar*, δεξιὰν xal apiote- pav. 2. Ei μὲν παρόδιός ἐστιν ὁ ἐρχόμενος, βοηϑεῖτε αὐτῷ ὅσον δύνασϑε' οὐ μενεῖ δὲ πρὸς ὑμᾶς εἰ μὴ δὺο 7 τρεῖς ἡμέρας, ἐὰν. 7 avayp4. 8. Ei δὲ ϑέλει πρὸς ὑμᾶς κα- S96 aí 1, τεχνίτης dv, ἐργα- GioSa καὶ φαγέτω. * eéere, Br. &oc. DOCUMENT I. bid you to give for others that lack, let no one judge him. CHAP. XII. RECEIVING DISCIPLES. 1. Let every one that comes in the name of the Lord be received, and then proving him ye shall know him ; for ye shall have understanding right and left. 2. If indeed he who comes is a wayfarer, help him as much as ye can; but he shall not remain with you longer than two or three days, unless there be necessity. 3. If he wishes to settle among you, being a crafts- man (artisan), let him work and eat (earn his living by work). 1 xa3í6a:, Ha. Hi. Z. Notes To CHAPTER XII. 1. Every one] who professes Christ. Hospitality is to be exercised to all without distinction, but not to the extent of encouraging idleness. Every one who can must work. Comp. 2 Thess iii. 10-12. Ye shall know, etc.] Ye shall know the difference between right and wrong, between true and false Christianity. : The Ap. Const. vii. 28 paraphrase the passage: ‘‘ Ye are.able to know the right hand from the left and to dis- tinguish false teachers from true teachers." Br. refers to 2 Cor. vi. 7 (* by the armor of righteousness on the righth and and the left"); 2 Tim. ii, 7 (**the Lord shall give thee understanding in all things "). Ha. takes 6Uv&6:v ἕξετε as a parenthesis. 2. παρόδιος. Post-classical for zapodirns, traveller. The Sept. has πάροδος, 2 Kings xii. 4 (which in classical Greek means entrance, side- entrance). Paul uses iv παρόδῳ, by the way, 1 Cor. xvi. 7. The Jews, hav- ing no country of their own, and being engaged in merchandise were great travellers, and so were the Jewish Christians (as Aquila and Priscilla, whom we find in Rome, Corinth, and Ephesus, Acts xvi. 3-5; xviii. 2). This habit tended to strengthen the ties of brotherhood and to promote catholicity. 8. Let him work, etc.] 2 Thess. iii. 10. ‘If any will not work, neither
