! TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 205 4. Ei δὲ οὐκ ἔχει τέχνην, 4. But if he has not handi- κατὰ τὴν σύνεσιν ὑμῶν προ- craft (trade), provide accord- γοήσατε, πῶς μὴ ἀργὸς eS’ ing to your understanding ὑμῶν δήσεται χριστιανός. that no Christian shall live 5. Ei δ᾽ ov ϑέλει οὕτω ποι- idle among you. iv, χριστέμπορός ἐστιν" προ- 5. And if he will not act Géyere ἀπὸ τῶν τοιούτων. thus he is ἃ Christ-trafficker. Beware of such. Keg, ty’. Cuap. XIII. TREATMENT OF PROPHETS. 1. Πᾶς δὲ προφήτης adnS1- 1. But every true Prophet vos, ϑέλων καϑῆσαι" zpos who wishes to settle among ὑμᾶς, ἀξιός ἐστι τῆς τροφῆς you is worthy of his food (or, αὐτοῦ. support). * καϑίδαι, Ha. Hi. Z. let him eat." Paul set the noblest example of self.support, working at his own trade at night after preaching the gospel during the day. The early Christians were mostly of the lower classes, artisans, freedmen, slaves. Society, like a house, is built and regenerated from the bottom upwards, not from the top downwards. Ha.: '* Wie nachdrücklich wird die Pflicht der Arbeit eingeschürft, und zugleich die Solidaritdt aller Gemeindeglieder |” A Christian.| The name only once in the Did. It arose among the Gentiles in Antioch between 40 and 50, Acts xi. 26, and occurs again xxvi. 28, and 1 Pet iv. 16. The usual designations among the Christians were, ‘‘ dis- ciples,” **believers," ‘‘ brethren,” ‘‘saints.” The last is used in the same general sense in Did. IV. 2. χριότέμπορος.] A Christ-trafficker, Christ-monger, 4. €., one who makes gain out of his Christian profession (comp. 1 Tim. vi. 5); & new word, but expressive and used afterwards by Pseudo-Ignatius and Pseudo-Clement. Barnabas (eh. x.) warns against selfish idlers who sponge upon Christian charity. Ignatius (Ad Eph. vii.) speaks of men ‘‘ whose practice is to carry about the name (of Christ) in wicked guile," whom we must shun ** as wild beasts." Polycarp(Ad Phil. vi.) warns the Philippians against those ** who bear the name of the Lord in hypocrisy.” Hermas (Mand. xi.) describes anitinerant charlatan who demands the first place in the assembly, lives in great luxury, and refuses to prophesy except for payment in advance. Lucian's Peregrinus Proteus is such an impostor who deceived the simple- hearted Christians. That race will never die out in this world. NorEs To CHAPTER XIII. 1. Hoery Prophet who wishes to settle among you.] There were two classes of Prophets, itinerant and stationary or local; while the Apostles were only itinerants (XI. 5). Worthy of his food] or support, maintenance, no more and no less, The / ZL | |

206 2. '(Ωσαύτως διδάσκαλος a- ληϑινὸς ἐστιν ἄξιος καὶ av- τός ὥσπερ ὁ ἐργάτης τῆς τρο- pis αὐτοῦ" 8. Πᾶσαν οὖν ἀπαρχὴν γεννημάτων ληνοῦ καὶ ἅλω- γος βοῶν TE καὶ προβάτων λαβὼν δώσεις τὴν [ἀπαρχὴν]" τοῖς προφήταις" αὐτοὶ yap εἶσιν οἱ ἀρχιερεῖς ὑμῶν. * Omit τ. ἀπαρχ. Br. et al. DOCUMENT I. 9. Likewise a true Teacher is himself worthy, like the workman, of his food.* 3. Therefore thou shalt take and give all the first- fruit of the produce of the wine-press and threshing- floor, of oxen and sheep, to the Prophets; for they are your chief-priests. * Matt. x. 10. principle and duty of ministerial support are laid down by Christ, Matt. x. 10 ; Luke x. 7, and by Paul 1 Cor. ix. 7, 9, 18, 14 ; 1 Tim. v. 18. 2. Likewise a true Teacher.] Prophets and Teachers are associated in Acts xiii. 1, distinguished in 1 Cor. xii. 28, 29; Eph. iv. 11. Paul cails him- self **an Apostle and Teacher" of the Gentiles, 1 Tim. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 11. .Rulers (ἡγ οὐμεν 01) and Teachers are identified in Heb. xiii. 7, 17. See the note of Ha., p. 50 sq. AU the first-fruits.] According to the provisions of the Mosaic law, Ex. xxii. 29; Num. xviii. 12; Deut. xviii. 8, 4; Ez. xliv. 80; Neh. x. 85-37. See Smith's or Schaff's Bible Dict. sub. First-fruits. The law prescribed also tithes, 7. e. the tenth of all produce, as well as of flocks and cattle; they belong to Jehovah and were paid to the Levites as the reward for their service, who were again ordered to devote a tenth of these receipts to the maintenance of the high-priest (Num. xviii. 21-28). The tithe is not men- tioned in the Did., but the Ap. Const. vii. 29 add after the first-fruits : ‘¢Thou shalt give the tenth of thy increase to the orphan, and to the widow, and to the poor and to the stranger.” For they are your me priests.| In the N. T. ἀρχιερεύς is used (1) of the Jewish high-priest (^ inn WISN, 5 ἱερεὺς ὁ μέγας), Matt. xxvi. 8, 62, 68, 65, etc.; (2) of Christ, the true and eternal high-priest, in the Ep. to the Hebrews (ii. 17 ; iii. 1, ete.) ; (3) in the plural, of the members of the Sanhedrin, and of the heads of the twenty-four classes of priests (Matt. ii. 4, etc.). The N. T. teaches the universal priesthood of all believers (2 Pet. ii. 9; Rev. i. 6), but nota special priesthood of ministers in distinction from the laity. This passage gives the first intimation of the sacerdotal view of the ministry, but the author confines it to the Prophets, and probably uses the word in a figurative or spiritual sense. The idea crept early and easily from the synagogue into the church, first by way of comparison and soon after in a realistic sense. About the same time (between A.D. 90 and 100) Bishop Clement of Rome (Ad Cor. ch. xl.) significantly compared the Christian ministry to the Aaronic priesthood and made a distinction between the

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 4. Ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ἔγητε προφή- την, δότε τοῖς πτωχοῖς" ὅ. Ἐὰν σιτίαν ποιῇς, τὴν ἀπαρχὴν λαβὼν δὸς κατὰ τὴν ἐντολήν" 6. .Ωσαύτως κεράμιον ot vov ἢ ἐλαίου ἀνοίξας, τὴν ἀπαρχὴν λαβὼν δὸς τοῖς προ- φήταις. 7. ‘Apyupiou δὲ καὶ ἱματισ- μοῦ καὶ παντὸς κτήματος λα- βὼν τὴν ἀπαρχὴν ὡς ἄν σοι δόξῃ, δὸς κατὰ τὴν ἐντολήν. 207 4. But if ye have no Pro- phet, give to the poor. 5. If thou preparest bread, take the first fruit and give according to the command- ment. 6. Likewise when thou openest a jar of wine or of oil, take the first-fruit and give to the Prophets. 7. And of silver, and rai- ment, and every possession, take the first-fruit, as may seem good to thee, and give according to the command- ment. clergy and laity. The passage has been declared an interpolation, but with- out any good reason. Thenext distinct trace of this idea we find in a letter of Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, about A.D. 190, to Victor, Bishop of Rome, as preserved by Eusebius (v. 24). Polycrates calls St. John ‘a priest who wore the sacerdotal plate" (ἱερεὺς τὸ πέταλον zepqopixos). Comp. Church Hist. ii. 216 ; and i. 431. After the close of the second century all the Bishops and Presbyters were called priests (ἱερεῖς, sacerdotes), and the Bishop sometimes Aigh-priest (ἀρχιρεύς, summus sacerdos, pontifex mazi- mus). Tertullian uses the terms (De Bapt. vii.; De Pud. i.; De Echort. Cast.) but as a Montanist he protested against a priestly order and asserted the universal priesthood of all believers. Cyprian is the chief cham- pion of sacerdotal episcopacy in the Ante-Nicene age. In the Ap. Const. the hierarchical and sacerdotal system is fully developed. I will only quote one passage (ii. 25): ‘‘ The Bishops are your high-priests, as the Presbyters are your priests, and your present Deacons instead of your Levites ; so are also your readers, your singers, your porters, your deaconesses, your widows, your virgins, and your orphans; but He who is above all these is the High Priest.” The sacerdotal view prevailed in all Christendom till the time of the Reformation, which returned to the primitive idea of the universal priest- hood of believers. See Church Hist. ii. 127, and 150 sq., and Lightfoot, Ex- curs. on the Christian Ministry in Com. on Philippians, p. 253 sqq. If ye have no Prophet.] There were therefore congregations without Prophets, but not without Bishops and Deacons (XV. 1). In the absence of the former the latter were to teach. The Did. marks the transition period from the Apostles and Prophets who were passing away, to the Bishops and Presbyters who began to take their place. διτίαν. διτία means in Byzantine Greek batch or baking of bread. (See
