208 DOCUMENT I. Keg. ιδ΄. | Cuap. XIV. Tux Lorp’s DAY AND THE SACRIFICE. 1. Kara κυριακὴν δὲ Κυρί. 1. And on the Lord's Day ov cvvaySévres κλάσατε ap- of the Lord* come together, rov xal εὐχαριστήσατε mpo- and break bread, and give σεξομολογησάμενοι" ta πα- thanks, having before con- * Rev. i. 10. * zpos&onu. v. Gebhardt, Hi. Ha. [in the notes but not in the text] Z. Sophocles, Gr. Lez., p. 990.) In classical Greek ozrza is the plural of διτίον, and means grain or food. Normes To CHAPTER XIV. This chapter interrupts the connection and should precede Ch. IX. But the writer, before proceeding to the local officers of the Church, inserts here a direction concerning the Lord's Day observance and publie worship which is to be conducted chiefly by the Prophets (comp. X. 7. Perhaps the more immediate association in his mind was the priest (XIII. 8) and the sacrifice (XIV. 1); for the ideas of priest, altar, and sacrifice are inseparable, whether they be used in the realistic or in the figurative sense. 1. On the Lord's Day of the Lord.] The first use of xvp:za»x) as a noun, but with the pleonastic addition rov κυρίου. St. John (Rev. i. 10) uses it first as an adjective, κυριακὴ ἡμέρα, Dominica dies. The resurrection of Christ, his appearance to the disciples, and the pentecostal outpouring of the Holy Spirit, all ‘of which took place on the first day of the week, are the ‘basis of the Christian Sunday. Its observance in the Apostolic age may be inferred from Acts xx. 7; 1 Cor. xvi. 2; Rev. i. 10. The Did. gives us the first post-Apostolie testimony for Sunday as & day of publie worship. Pliny (Letter to Trajan, x. 97) calls it ‘the stated day," on which the Christians in Bithynia assembled before daylight, to sing hymns to Christ as a God, and to bind themselves by ἃ sacramentum. Bar- nabas (Ep. xv.) calls it ** the eighth " day, in opposition to the Jewish Sab- bath. Ignatius (Ad Magnes. ix.) calls it κυριακῇ, likewise in opposition to the Jewish observance (μηκέτι δσαββατίζοντες, ἀλλὰ κατὰ xvpiaxnv ζῶντες). Justin Martyr: ‘the day called Sunday" (ἡ τοῦ 'HAíiov A&£yo- μένῃ ἡμέρα, Apol. i. Ixvii), on which the Christians hold their common assembly, because it is the first day of creation and the day on which Jesus Christ their Saviour rose from the dead. Break bread and give thanks.] Designation of the Agape and Eucharist. Acts ii. 46 ; xx. 7, 11; 1 Cor. x. 16. This was the regular Lord's Day ser- vice, connected no doubt with Scripture reading, praying, singing, exhorta- tion, according to Old Testament precedent. Ha.: '* Es ist von hóchster Bedeutung für die Geschichte des Cultus, dass der Verfasser der Did. fiw den Sonntagsgottesdienst lediglich die Feier des Abendmahls nach vorher- gegangener Exhomologese vorschreibt.” προδεξομολογηδαίμεν οἱ] having confessed in addition to, or in connec-

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 209 , ~ . - ραπτωώματα ὑμῶν, ὅπως κα- fessed your transgressions," Sapa ἡ ϑυσία ἡμῶν qn. that your sacrifice may be pure. | 2. Πᾶς δὲ ἔχων τὴν " ἄμφι- 2. Let no one who has a βολίαν μετὰ τοῦ ἑταίρου av- dispute with his fellow come roD μὴ συνελθέτω ὑμῖν ἕως together with you until they * Comp. James v. 16. *-rzr a, von Gebhardt, Ha. Z. tion with, thanksgiving; but this verb occurs nowhere else and is probably a writing error for προεξομ, having before confessed. This emendation was suggested by von Geb. and is adopted by Ha. in the notes, though not in the text. First confession of sin, then thanksgiving. Confession is here en. joined as a regular part of public worship, and is also enforced IV. 14 (ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ i&ouoAoyn)ógp τὰ παραπτώματα Gov). Comp. Jas. v. 16. In the Ap. Const. vii. 80 the confession of sin in connection with the Eucharist is omitted. That your sacrifice may be pure.} ϑυσία (from Svo, to kill and offer as sacrifice) is often used tropically of spiritual sacrifices of praise and self-con- secration, Rom. xii. 1 (3vc/av ξῶσαν): 1 Pet. iib (πνευματικας SvGías); Phil. ii. 17 (ϑυσία καὶ λειτουργία τῆς πίότεως); Heb. xiii. 15. (ava ge- ρῶμεν ϑυσίαν ἀϊνέδεως διαπαντὸς τῷ Std.) The Eucharist, as the name indicates, was regarded as a feast of thanksgiving for all the mercies of God, temporal and spiritual, especially for the redemption, and as a sacrifice of renewed consecration of the whole congregation to Christ in re- turn for his self-sacrifice for our sins. The elements of bread and wine were tokens and types of the gifts of nature and the gifts of grace with reference to the’broken body and shed blood. They were presented as a thank-offering by the members of the congregation, and the remnants were given to the poor. Inthese gifts the Christian people yielded themselves as a priestly race to God, the giver of all good. Justin Martyr, Dial. c. Tryph. Jud. c. exvii.: ““ Accordingly God, anticipating all the sacrifices which we offer through this name, and which Jesus the Christ enjcined us to offer, 7. e., in the Eucharist of the bread and the cup, and which are presented by Christians in all places throughout the world, bears witness that they are well-pleasing to Him." In his account of the celebration of the Eucharist, Apol. i. Ixv., Jus- tin M. says: ‘‘ When the President (the Bishop) has given thanks, and ail the people have expressed their assent [by saying Amen], those who are called by us * Deacons' give to each of those present to partake of the bread and wine mixed with water over which the thanksgiving was pronounced, and to those who are absent they carry away a portion (Ixvi.) And this food is called among us * Eucharist,’ of which no one is allowed to partake but those who believe that the things we teach are true, and who have been washed with the washing for the remission of sins and who are living as Christ has enjoined.” 2. Until they are reconciled. ] Aecording to the direction of Christ, Matt. 14

210 DOCUMENT I. oU διαλλαγῶώσιν, iva un xot are reconciled, that your sac- νωϑῇ ἡ Svoia ἡμῶν *. rifice may not be defiled.* ὃ. Αὕτη yap ἐστιν ἡ pySei- 8. For this is that which σα ὑπὸ Κυρίου: ‘Ev παντὶ wasspoken by the Lord : ‘In τοπῷ xal χρόνῳ προσφέρειν every place and time offer me * ὑμῶν, Br. &c. * Comp. Matt. v. 23, 24. v. 23, 24. Reconciliation among men is a necessary prerequisite of a worthy communion which celebrates the reconciliation between God and man through the atoning sacrifice of Christ. This is implied here. Br. com- pares Irenzus, Adv. Her. iv. 18, 1. May not be defiled.] Br. quotes Matt. xv. 11-20 ; Mark vii. 15-28; Acts x. 15, 21, 28; Heb. ix. 13. Justin M. says (Apol.i.1xvi): . . . **Sowe, who through the name of Jesus have believed as one man in God the Maker of : all, have been stripped, through the name of his first-begotten Son, of the filthy garments, that is of our sins ; and being vehemently inflamed by the word of his calling, we are the true high-priestly race of God, as even God himself bears witness, saying, that in every place among the Gentiles sacri- fices are presented to Him well pleasing and pure (Mal. i. 10-12.) Now God receives sacrifices from no one, except through his priests." 8. Spoken by the Lord.] xvptos seems to refer to Christ, just mentioned in ver. 1, and implies that the writer believed in the pre-existence of Christ who spoke through the Prophets ; comp. 1 Pet. i. 10, 11. (An argu- ment against the charge of Ebionism. ) The distinction made by Gordon that the Did. uses κύριος without the article of God, and 6: κύριος of Christ is untenable ; see the title διδαχὴ κυρίου. In every place.) A free quotation of Mal. i. 11, 14 (Sept.). The only | quotation from the canonical books of the O. T. except that in XVI. 7 from Zech. xiv. 5. See above, Ch. XXIV. 78 sqq. The passage of Malachi was generally understood in the ancient church to be a prophecy of the eucharistic sacrifice. Justin M. refers to it frequently, Apol. i. lxvi.; Dial. c. Tryph. Jud. c. xxviii; xli.; exvi.; exvii.; so also Ireneus Adv. Her. iv. 17, 5, 6; 18, 1,4; Clement of Alex. Sfrom. v. 14, 186; Tertullian, Ado. Jud. v.; Adv. Marc. iii. 22. The “Second Ordinances of the Apostles” (δεύτεραι τῶν ‘Anoor. διαταξεις) spoken of in the sec- ond Irenzus Fragment (ed. Stieren i. 854, and ed. Harvey ii. 500), probably refer to the Eucharistic sacrifice as the new sacrifice of the New Covenant (ría προόφορα ἐν τῇ καινῇ 01a099»:, in the place of the old sacrifices which ceased with the destruction of the Temple. Br. thinks it not unlikely (undev d zíSavov)that these second Apostolic Ordinances are identical with our Did. This is at least far more probable than the opposite conject- ure of Krawutzeky that the Did. was written in Ebionitie opposition to those Ordinances on account of the omission of νέα. See above p. 24, note. Bickell, on the contrary, finds here the germ of the Roman mass, and | R. Catholic controversialists constantly appeal to the same passage of Mala- ( ehiin proof of that institution. But the Did. plainly means only a thank.
