TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 211 μοι Sucíav xaSapav: ort a pure sacrifice, for I am a βασιλεὺς μέγας εἰμί, λέγει great King, saith the Lord, Κύριος, xal τὸ ὄνομά pov and my name is wonderful ϑαυμαστὸν £v rois éSveot. among the Gentiles.” * Keg. 18. CRAP. XV. BisHops ΑΝ DEACONS. 1. Χειροτονήσατε οὖν ἕαυ- 1, Elect therefore for your- τοῖς ἐπισκόπους καί διακόνους selves Bishops and Deacons * Mal. i. 11, 14. offering by the whole congregation. The idea of the Lord's Supper as an actual though unbloody repetition of the atoning sacrifice on the cross by the hands of the priest, came in later in the third century, at the timeof Cyprian, in connection with the sacerdotal conception of the ministry, and the literal interpretation of the altar, Heb. xiii. 10. The truth underlying the Greek and Roman mass (for in this respect the two churches are entirely agreed) is the commemoration and renewed application of the one all-sufficient sacrifice on the cross in the Lord's Supper. On the gradual development of the idea of the Eucharistic sacrifice see Church History, vol. ii. 245 sq. and iii. 5083 sqq. Notes TO CHAPTER XV. This chapter treats of the local or stated and permanent ministers of the gospel. It is separated from the chapters on the Apostles and Prophets (XI.-XIII.), but connected with them by the eucharistic sacrifice on the Lord’s Day as the chief part of Christian worship (XIV.). The congregations could not rely on the occasional services of these itinerant Teachers, who gradually passed away, together with the extraordinary gifts. Comp. above Ch. XIL, p. 78 sqq. 1. χειροτονήδσατε. The Greek verb means in classical writers to stretch out the hand (χείρ), or to vote for by show of hands ; then to elect, to appoint. So in Acts xiv. 28 ; 2 Cor. viii. 19; and here. Ignatius uses it in the same sense, 6. g., Ad Philad. x. 1 (ed. Zahn, p. 80: πρέπον ἐστὶν ὑμῖν, ws ix. xAgóia S500, χειροτονῆσαι διάκονον εἰς τὸ mpEeGBevoar ixe? SeoD πρεσβείαν) ; comp. Ad Smyrn. xi. 29; Ad Polyc. vii. 9. The congrega- tional officers, and even the Bishops and Popes were elected and supported by the people during the first centuries ; but afterwards the Priests of the diocese monopolized the election of the Diocesan, and the college of Cardi- nals the election of the Pope. In later ecclesiastical Greek, yeroorov&éc means £o ordain, Ap. Const. viii. 4, 5, and Ap. Can. i: ‘Let a Bishop be ordained (yetporoveióSc) by two or three Bishops," and Ap. Can. ii.: * Let a Presbyter or Deacon, and the other Clergy, be ordained by one Bishop." Hence the Ap. Const. in the parallel passage vii. 31 substitute προχειρίραδϑε for yetporovnóart. ἐπιόκόπους.)] Used in the same sense as πρεόβύτεροι, who for this rea- son are omitted, as in the Pastoral Epistles (1 Tim. iii. 8-18, and Phil. i. 1).

212 ἀξίους τοῦ Κυρίου, ἄνδρας πραεῖς καὶ apilapyvpovs xai ἀληϑεῖς καὶ δεδοκιμασμένου-ς" ὑμῖν γὰρ λειτουργοῦσι καὶ αὐτοὶ τὴν λειτουργίαν τῶν προφητῶν καὶ διδασκάλων. 2. My οὗν ὑπερίδητε αὐ- TOUS: αὐτοὶ yap εἶσιν οἱ TE- TIMNMEVOL ὑμῶν μετὰ τῶν προφητῶν καὶ διδασκαλῶων. ὃ. , EMyxere δὲ ἀλλήλους μὴ ἕν ὀργῇ αλλ' ἐν εἰρήνῃ, ὡς ἔχετε εν τῷ εὐαγγελίφ' καὶ παντὶ ἀστοχοῦντι κατὰ τοῦ ἑτέρου μηδεὶς λαλείτω μηδὲ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν ἀκουέτω," ἕως OU μετανοήσῃ. DOCUMENT I. worthy of the Lord, men meek, and not lovers of money, and truthful, and ap- proved; for they too minister to you the ministry of the Prophets and Teachers. 2. Therefore despise them not, for they are those that are the honored [men] among you with the Prophets and Teachers. 3. And reprove one another not in wrath, but in peace, as ye have [it] in the gos- pel ; and with every one that transgresses against another let no one speak, nor let him hear [a word] from you un- til he repents. * ἀπουέόϑω, Hi. Z. The Didachographer and Clement of Rome furnish the last instances of the promiscuous use of these two terms which originally signified one and the same office. They wrote in the short period of transition from the Presby- tero-Episcopate to the distinctive Episcopate. A few years later, in the Ignatian Epistles, the two officers are clearly distinct, although the Bishop of Ignatius is not yet a diocesan of a number of churches (as in Irenus, Ter- tullian, and Cyprian), but simply the head of the college of Presbyters and Deacons of one congregation. : ἀφιλαργύρους |] Comp. 1. Tim. iii. 4. Love of money and love of power were the besetting sins of the clergy from the beginning, in strong contrast with the example and teaching of the Apostles. τὴν λειτουργίαν τῶν προφητῶν καὶ 0190a6xaAcv.] The Apostles and Prophets were passing away or not always present, and the Bishops and Deacons gradually took their place. The qualifications and the duties are essentially the same (comp. XT. 11; XIII. 1, 2). Hence Paul requires the Bishop to be ‘‘apt to teach" (διδακτικός), 1 Tim. iii, 2; 2 Tim. ii. 94. This is inconsistent with the idea of a purely administrative and financial function of the primitive Bishops, as advocated by Hateh and Harnack, 9. This ver. likewise implies the gradual transition then going on from the extraordinary offices of inspired Apostles and Prophets to the ordinary Bish- ops and Presbyters who inherited the dignity of the former, but were liable at first to be despised as compared with the former. Hence the warning. oi τετιμημέν οἱ] used as a noun, those held in honor.
