4 TEACHING OF. THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 4. Tas δὲ εὐχὰς ὑμῶν καὶ τὰς ἐλεημοσύνας καὶ πάσας τὰς πραξεις οὕτως ποιήσατε ὡς ἔχετε ἐν τῷ εὐαγγελέω τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν. Κεφ. 1$. 1. pny opeire ὑπὲρ τῆς δω- 775 ὑμῶν' ot λύχνοι ὑμῶν μὴ σβεσϑήτωσαν, καὶ at ὀσφύες ὑμῶν μὴ ἐκλυέσϑωσαν, ἀλλὰ γίνεσϑε ἕτοιμοτ' οὐ yap oid a- τε τὴν ὥραν ἐν ἡ ὁ Κύριος ἡμῶν ἔρχεται. 8 Luke xil. 35. 218 4. But so do your prayers and alms and all your actions as ye have [it] in the gospel of our Lord. Cuar. XVI. WATCHFULNESS AND THE COMING OF CHRIST. 1. Watch over your life ; let not your lamps be quenched and let not your loins be un- loosed,* but be ye ready; for ye know not the hour in which our Lord comes." b Matt. xxv. 13. Notes TO CHAPTER XVI. This chapter is a very proper conclusion of the Church Manual. It looks to. the end of the present world and the glorious coming of Christ, and ex- horts to watehfulness in view of that event for which Christians should always keep themselves in readiness whether it may happen sooner or later. The chapter is a summary of the eschatological discourses of our Lord in the Synoptical Gospels, especially Matt. xxiv. It might have been written before the destruction of the old theocracy but for the fact that all the specific references to Jerusalem and the Temple are omitted, as if that part of the Lord's prophecy had already been fulfilled. Comp. here Matt. xxiv. 42-44 ; Luke xii. 35 ; 1 Thess. iv. 15-18; 2 Thess. ii. 1-19; 2 Tim. iii. 1-7; Jas. v. 7-11; 2 Pet. iii., Jude, and the Apocalypse. Watch.] γρηγορέω is often used in the N. T. with reference to the sec- ond coming, Matt. xxiv. 42, 43; xxv. 18, etc. ὑπὲρ τῆς ζωῆς, comp. Heb. xiii. 17: ‘‘ They watch in behalf of your souls as they that shall give ac. count ? Let not your lamps be quenched, etc.] A reminiscence from Luke xii. 35: &6roóav ὑμῶν αἱ o6qutes περιεζωόμέναι, καὶ oi λύχνοι (the plural oecurs only in Luke, Matthew has λαμπάδες, xxv. 1, 8, 4, 7,8) xatópev ot. Comp. also Eph. vi. 14: ‘‘having girded your loins with truth. For ye know not the hour. ] From Matt. xxiv. 42, γρηγορεῖτε οὖν, OTL OVX οἴδατε ποίᾳ ἡμέρᾳ ὁ κύριος ὑμῶν ἔρχεται. Comp. Matt. xxv. 18: o0 x οἴδατε τὴν ἡμέραν οὐδὲ THY ὥραν. Ha. notes a similar mixture of texts of Luke and Matthew in Tatian’s Diatessaron. See Zahn's Forschungen zur Gesch. des neutestam. Kanons, i. (1881) p. 200.

* 214 3. IIvxv Gs δὲ συναχϑήσεσ- Se QmgroDvres τὰ ἀνήκοντα ταῖς ψυχαῖς ὑμῶν. ου γὰρ ὠφελήσει ὑμᾶς o πᾶς χρόνος τῇς πίστεως ὑμῶν ἐὰν μὴ ἐν τῷ ἐσχάτῳ καιρῷ τελειωθῆτε. 8. Ἐν γὰρ ταῖς ἐσχάταις ἡμέραις πληθυνθήσονται οἵ ψευδοπροφῆται καὶ οἱ φϑο- ρεῖς καὶ στραφήσονται τὰ πρόβατα εἰς λύκους καὶ ἡ aya) στραφήσεται εἷς μῖσος. 4, Αὐξανούσης yap τῆς ἀνομίας μισήσουσιν ἀλλήλους καὶ διωξουσι καὶ παραδώ- σουσι, καὶ τότε φανήσεται ὁ DOCUMENT I. 2. But be ye frequently gathered together, seeking the things that are profitable for your souls ; for the whole time of your faith shall not profit you except in the last season ye be found perfect. 3. For in the last days the false prophets and destroyers shall be multiplied, and the sheep shall be turned into wolves, and love shall be turned into hate. 4. For when lawlessness increases, they shall hate and persecute, and deliver up one another; and then shall ap- pear the world-deceiver as HOG uozAÀavos ὡς υἱὸς Θεοῦ xal 2. Be ye frequently gathered together.] Barnabas ch. iv. 9: ** Let us take heed (προσέχωμεν, as Ha. and Hi. read with the Lat. version) i» the last days, tor the whole (past) time of our faith will profit us nothing (οὐδὲν ὠφεληήδει ὁ HAS xypovos τῆς πίότεως ἡμῶν) unless now in this wicked time (ἐν rà ἀνόμω καιρῷ) we also withstand the coming scandals as be- cometh the sons of God." See other references in Br. and Ha. 8. In the last days] between the first and second coming of our Lord, be- tween the aZà» οὗτος and the aZà» μέλλων. Among the Jews it meant the last days of the afwy οὗτος, before the coming of the Messiah. The phrase is often used in the N. T., and is connected with the expectation of the speedy end of the world, ἐν ἐόχαταις ἡμέραις. Actsii. 17. 2 Tim. iii.1; Jas. v. 8; also ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτων (ἐόχατου) τῶν ἡμερῶν, Heb. i. 1; 2 Pet. iii. 8; ἐν καιρῷ éióyarco 1 Pet. i. 5; àv ἐόχατω χρόνω, Jude 18; én) ἐόχατων τῶν χρόνων, 1 Pet. i. 20; ἐόχατῃ ἡμέρα, 1 John ii. 6, and τὰ τέλη τῶν αἰώνων, 1 Cor. x. 11. Barnabas iv. 9 usesév rais ἐσχάταις ἡμέραις. 3. The false prophets.] Matt. xxiv. 11 : ** many false Prophets shall rise aud shall lead many astray.” φϑορεῖς, destroyers, corrupters, used in v. 2; comp. 2 Pet. ii. 12: ‘they shall in their destroying (ἐν τῇ pSopa αὐτῶν) surely be destroyed (φϑαρήδον rar)" The sheep shall be turned into wolves, etc.] Even some of the believers will fall away under the terrible temptations and trials of the last days. 4. When lawlessness increases.| Matt. xxiv. 12: '*because lawlessness shall be multiplied (01d τὸ πληϑθυν ϑῆναι τὴν avouiav)the love of many shall wax cold.” ὁ κοόμοπλαγος] the world-deceiver, 4. e. the antichrist, ‘‘the man of

\ TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. ποιήσει σημεῖα xol τέρατα, καὶ ἡ γῇ παραδοϑήσεται εἰς χεῖρας αὐτοῦ, καὶ ποιήσει ἀϑέμιτα ἃ οὐδέποτε γέγονεν EG αἰῶνος. | 5. Tore ἥξει ἡ κτίσις τῶν ἀνθρώπων εἰς τὴν πύρωσιν τῆς δοκιμασίας καὶ σκανδα- λισϑήσονται πολλοὶ καὶ ἀπο- λοῦνται, oí δὲ ὑπομείναντες ἐν τῇ πίστει αὐτῶν σωϑήδον- ται ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ καταϑέ- ματος. . * Comp. Matt. * 41615, Hi 215 Son of God, and shall do signs and wonders,* and the earth shall be delivered into his hands, and he shall com- mit iniquities which have never yet come to pass from the beginning of the world. 5. And then shall the race of men come into the fire of trial, and many shall be offended and shall perish ; but they who endure in their faith shall be saved under the curse itself [?]. xxiv. 24. tan Hi. Z. sin, the son of perdition, he that opposeth and exalteth himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped ; so that he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God,” 2 Thess.^ii. 3, 4; ‘‘the lawless one," ver. 8. The word is new, but coined from Rev. xii. 9: ὁ πλανῶν τὴν οἰκουμένην, ‘‘the deceiver of the whole world” (said of Satan), and 9 John ver. 7: ὁ zAavos xai ἀντίχριστος, * the deceiver and the anti- christ.” It occurs again in Ap. Const. vii. 32: καὶ rore φανηόδεται ὁ xoó- μοπλάνος. e$ υἱὸς Seov.| Ha.: als wire er Gottes Sohn. Comp. 2 Thess. ii. 4 : **he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God" (6rz ἔστιν Se- os). The expression implies, by contrast, that Christ is truly, what his antagonist pretends to be, the Son of God. Antichrist was regarded as the Christ of hell, as the devil is the god of hell. 5. The fire of trial] not purgatory in the future world, but a probatory fire of trial or testing in this world; for the writer speaks of men then living. Comp. 1 Pet. iv. 12 : ** Brethren, think it not strange concerning the ‘fiery tria! among you, which cometh upon you to prove you” (τῇ ἐν ὑμὶν zvpa- 6&1 πρὸς πειραδμὸν ὑμὶν yivou£vy). They who have endured in their faith shall be saved.] Matt. x. 22: '*he that endureth: to the end the same shall be saved.” Also Matt. xxiv. 18. Um αὐτοῦ τοῦ xaraSéuaros.] The most difficult passage next to ‘‘ the cosmic mystery" in XI. 11. κατάϑεμα = καταγαάϑεμα, curse. It is adopted by Tischendorf, W. and H., and the Revisers in Rev. xxii. 8 (with ἐξ * A, B, P); comp. Zech. xiv. 18, Sept., οὐκ ἔσται ἀνάϑεμα ἕτι. Vari- ous interpretations and renderings : (1) Under (or, from under) the curse itself, namely the accursed world-de-

216 DOCUMENT I. 6. Kal τότε φανήσεται ta 6. And then shall appear σημεῖα τῆς ἀληθείας" πρῶτον the signsof the truth: first ceiver ; comp. Matt. xiii. 14, ** the abomination of desolation” (ro 68£Avy- μα τῆς ἐρημηδεως). The saints will suffer from the tyrannical persecution and temptation of Antichrist, but will be delivered at last from his power. This suits the context. The radical Homeric meaning of ὑπὸ is under, from under, especially after the verbs ἐρύεόϑαι, ὡρπάζειν, ῥυεῦϑαι, rescuing from under another's power, or out of danger. See Liddell and Scott, sub ὁ ὑπὸ, No. I. Fa.: under the very curse. H. and N.: from under the curse itself. (2) By the curse himself, i. e., by Christ who is called a curse, or who is cursed by his enemies. So Br. (róv Χριότὸν i6ws λέγει, ὃν xarava- Seuarióovóiv οἱ ὁκανδαλισϑηδόμενοι ἐν αὐτῷ), and Ha. (von dem Verfluchten sel'.st), with reference to 1 Cor. xii. 8: ‘‘no man speaking in the Spirit of God saith, ‘ Jesus is anathema’ (dva Seua ἸησοῦΞς), and to the maledicere Christo, which Jews and heathen tried to extort from the Chris- tians (Pliny’s Hp. ad Traj., and Martyr. Polyc. ix. 8: λοιδόρηδον τὸν Xpiórov. So also St.: ‘‘by him the curse," and Spence: They will be saved ‘‘through Him whom they have been so sorely tempted to revile and curse, and who, in terrible irony is here called ‘the very curse ;’” but he translates, inconsistently : ‘‘ under the very curse.” (8) ἐπ’ αὐτοῦ roD κάτω Séyuaros (ἤγουν ἐπὶ τῆς y7HS), ἃ textual correction which Br. proposes,in his notes as an alternative, but which he has given up in a letter to Ha. in favor of the first explanation (ατάϑεμα λέγει. . . ἢ τὸν xoóuozAavov, ἢ τὴν ϑείαν xaSoÀov ἀράν). (4) ax’ instead of ὑπ᾽, from the curse itself. A conjecture of Hi. and Z. (b) From this curse. This would require τούτου instead of αὐτοῦ. So H. and B. in the first ed., but in the second ed.: from under even this curse, Which H. explains : ''from under the curse just described, the riot of in- iquity."^ B. M. and Sa. de cette malédiction. (6) ** They who endure in their faith shall be preserved beneath the very curse," that is, the trial when it is at its uttermost. So Prof. Orris (of Princeton) in the N. Y. ‘‘ Independent" for May 7, 1885. But 69376ovra1 must have the same meaning as in the parallel passages Matt. x. 22 and xxiv. 13. | (7 Krawutzeky (in his second essay, J. e. p. 582): ‘‘ under the Temple Mount doomed to destruction. The Ebionites still turned in prayer towards the Temple." Very far-fetched. (6) And then shall.appear the signs of the truth.] Matt. xxiv. 3: ‘what shall be the sign of thy presence (ro σημεῖον τῆς 67s παρουσίας) and of the end of the world ?” Ver. 30: ** 7'hen shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven.” The “truth” is here either Christ himself (comp. John xiv. 6 (Ey ὦ £iu1 ἡ a AoStta), or the truth as believed by the Christians concerning the second coming. The three signs are peculiar to the Did., but were derived from Matt. xxiv. 30, 31.

TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 217 σημεῖον ἐκπετάσεως " ἐν ov- thesignofopeningin heaven; ρανῷ, εἶτα σημεῖον φωνῆς then the sign of the voice of σάλπιγγος, καὶ τὸ τρίτον the trumpet; and the third, ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν" the resurrection of the dead. * ἐπιφάσεως, Potivin. First the sign of an opening in heaven] ἐκπέτασις, does not occur in the N. T. nor in the Sept., but in Plutarch in the sense of ὦ spreading out, an expansion (from éxmeravvuyut, to spread out, e. g., a sail). So here. It means an wnrolling or an opentng in heaven through which Christ with his saints and angels shall descend. It is a preparatory phenomenon in the skies. The shining glory of the parousia precedes the personal parousia. Comp. Matt. iii. 16 (at the Baptism of Christ ‘‘the heavens were opened, ἡνεῳχϑησαν); Rev. xix. 11 (*Isaw the heaven opened, ἡγεωχμέν ον). H. and B.: an opening in heaven. Sa.: les cieux S'ouvriront. Other inter- pretations : (1) The expansion of the sign of the cross, that is of Christ himself with outstretched arms as on the cross, So the Fathers explained **the sign of the Son of man in heaven," mentioned in Matt. xxiv. 80. But the Lord's personal appearance is mentioned last, in ver. 8. (2) The sign of the flying forth (Fa.), or a soaring forth (Sp.). This ren- dering implies the derivation of ἐκπέτασις from ἐκπέτομαι or ἐκπέ- rauat, to fly out, or, away (in Aristotle and Euripides). Br. and Fa. refer it to the ἑρπαγῇῃ of the then living saints ‘‘ who shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air," 1 Thess. iv. 17. Fa.: ‘‘This seems to be the nearest approach to a quotation from St. Paul, though the order of events appears to be different" [?]. But in this case it would be better to understand here the angels who are sent out to gather the elect from one end of heaven to the other, Matt. xxiv. 31; comp. Rev. xiv. 6: “1 saw another angel flying in mid heaven (πετόμενον iv utGovpavnuar:) (8) Useless textual erhendations by Potwin: éxipacews (éxipacis= ἐπιφάνεια, a becoming visible, a display); and by Hayman: ἐκπτώσεως (ἔκπτωσις, a falling out, breaking forth), with reference.to the falling of the stars from heaven, Mark xiii. 25; Matt. xxiv. 29 (οἱ ἀστέρες πεδοῦν- ται ἀπὸ ro) οὐραν οὔ). 7. The sign of the voice of the trumpet.] Matt. xxiv. 81: '* He shall send forth his angels μετὰ 6«Az1yy 05$ φωνῆς μεγάλης, with a great sound of a trumpet," or, **a trumpet of great sound" (W. and Hort put φωνῇς on the margin); 1 Cor. xv. 52: ‘‘in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump (ἐν τῇ éóyarg oó«AmIyy1); for the trumpet shall sound (δαλπίόει yap), and the dead shall be raised incorruptible ;” 1 Thess. iv. 16: ‘‘ The Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout (àv κελευόματι), with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God (ἐν GaAmiyy1 Seov).” The resurrection of the dead.] The Did. seems to make the resurrection precede the parousia; while Matthew, xxiv. 30, 31, reverses the order. But it cannot be supposed that the author conflicts with his favorite Gospel, and
